<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Condition of Catholics Under James I.</title>
      <author><name reg="Morris, John">John Morris</name></author>
      <author><name reg="Gerard, John">John Gerard</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 7, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">35501</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-02-07">February 7, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Robert Cicconetti, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made
            available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Condition of Catholics Under James I.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Father Gerard's Narrative of the Gunpowder Plot</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Edited, With His Life, By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">John Morris,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Priest of the Society of Jesus</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London: Longmans, Green, &amp; Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1871</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Life Of Father John Gerard</head>

<div>
<head>I.</head>

<p>
The life and character of a witness are the grounds on which we
base our estimate of his credibility. That he should have spoken
of himself at great length and with many and minute details is a
circumstance most favourable to the formation of an accurate
judgment respecting him. Such is fortunately our position with
regard to Father John Gerard, the author of the Narrative of the
Gunpowder Plot. He has left a full and most interesting
autobiography in Latin; and we have felt that we could not do
the reader a better service, or better establish the good fame of a
man who has been unjustly accused, than by prefixing to his
Narrative translations of large portions of his Autobiography.
When the life of Father Gerard is before the reader, we will
address ourselves directly to the subject of his veracity, and in
conclusion, we will give what is known of the history of the
Autobiography, and of the autograph manuscript from which the
Narrative of the Powder Plot is printed.
</p>

<p>
John Gerard was the second son of Sir Thomas Gerard, of
Bryn,<note place='foot'><q>William Gerard, son of William who died at Eton-hall in 26 Edward III.
[1352], by his marriage with Joan, daughter and heiress of Sir Peter Bryn de
Brynhill, convertible into Sir Peter Brynhill de Bryn, became possessed of
Bryn, Ashton, and other estates, which have remained in the Gerards of Bryn
ever since.</q> ... <q>This family have had four seats within the township of
Ashton, viz., Old Bryn, abandoned five centuries ago; New Bryn, erected
in the reign of Edward VI.; Garswood, taken down at the beginning of the
present century; and the New Hall, the present residence of the family, built
by the Launders about the year 1692, and purchased by the Gerards forty
years ago</q> (Baines, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Lancaster</hi>, 1836, vol. iii., pp. 637, 639).</note> Lancashire, Knight, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John
Port, of Etwal, Derbyshire, Knight. In the Narrative<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</note> of the
Plot, when he has occasion to speak of his elder brother Thomas,
who received knighthood from King James on his accession, he
says <q>that was to him no advancement whose ancestors had been
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
so for sixteen or seventeen descents together.</q> This Sir Thomas
was made a baronet at the first creation of that dignity in 1611.
</p>

<p>
<q>I was born,</q> in 1564, <q>of Catholic parents, who never concealed
their profession, for which they suffered much from our
heretic rulers; so much so that, when a child of five years of age,
I was forced, together with my brother who was also a child,
to dwell among heretics under another roof, for that my father,
with two other gentlemen, had been cast into the Tower of
London, for having conspired to restore the Scottish Queen to
liberty and to her kingdom. She was at that time confined in the
county of Derby</q> [at Tutbury<note place='foot'>Tutbury is in Staffordshire, on the borders of Derbyshire, near to Etwal.</note>] <q>at two miles distance from us.
Three years afterwards, my father, having obtained his release by
the payment of a large sum, brought us home, free however from
any taint of heresy, as he had maintained a Catholic tutor over us.</q>
</p>

<p>
Sir Thomas Gerard was again in the Tower of London later
on, and had been there more than two years when his son landed
in England as a Priest.<note place='foot'>Public Record Office, <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Elizabeth</hi>, vol. 215, n. 19. <q>Return of
Prisoners in the Tower,</q> endorsed in Lord Burghley's hand, <q>2 Julii, 1588</q>
[an error for August]. <q>April 1, 1585. <hi rend='italic'>Imprimis</hi>, the Earl of Arundel,
prisoner three years four months.... August 23, 1586. Sir Thomas Gerard,
Knight, prisoner one year eleven months: indicted for treason.</q> At the end
of the list are the names of five Priests <q>committed for religion.</q> From
the Tower Sir Thomas Gerard was removed to the Counter in Wood-street
(<hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 217, n. 27).</note> A little before this imprisonment, he
had been summoned by his kinsman,<note place='foot'>Sir Gilbert Gerard was of the family of the Gerards of Ince, a younger
branch of the Gerards of Bryn. His eldest son, Sir Thomas, was the first
Lord Gerard of Gerards Bromley.</note> Sir Gilbert Gerard, the
Master of the Rolls, to compound for his recusancy by the <q>free
offer</q> of a yearly sum to be paid to the Queen, <q>to be freed from
the penalty of the statute.</q> As it gives an excellent idea of the
exactions to which wealthy Catholics were continually subjected
in those days, we subjoin Sir Thomas' <q>offer.</q> The original in
the Public Record Office<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 187, n. 48, viii.</note> is signed by himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>14 die Martii, 1585.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sir Thomas Gerard saith that he is greatly in debt, by reason
of his troubles and suretyship, and payeth large interest for the
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
same; and hath sold much of his lands and departed with a large
portion of the rest unto his sons; and hath two daughters to
bestow, so that he is not able to offer any great sums unto Her
Highness in this behalf</q> [preparation to resist the Spanish
invasion]. <q>Yet, nevertheless, he most humbly submitteth
himself unto Her Majesty's pleasure, offering his person to
serve Her Highness in any place of the world. And if he shall
not be admitted thereto, then he offereth, with very good will,
30<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a-year, which is the fourth part of his small portion remaining,
now left to maintain himself, his poor wife and children.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas Gerard.</hi></q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The name of <q>Dame Elizabeth Gerard</q> heads the list of
thirty-three <q>Recusants sometimes resident about London and in
Middlesex, but now dispersed into other countries.</q>
</p>

<p>
With regard to the mention of property transferred by Sir
Thomas Gerard to his sons, it may be interesting to quote from
the information of a spy,<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 251, n. 14. Feb. 3, 1595.</note> given just ten years later, the following
details&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, John Gerard the Jesuit hath certain houses in Lancashire,
called Brockehouse Row, near Ashton; he hath made
leases, and one tenant hath not paid all his fine: old John
Southworth, dwelling thereabouts, is his bailiff, who can show
how else the land and title standeth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At the age of fifteen,</q> the Autobiography resumes, <q rend='pre'>I was
sent to Exeter College, Oxford, where my tutor was a certain
Mr. Leutner,<note place='foot'>Probably Edmund Lewckener, who appears in the College books as one
of the new fellows on Sir W. Petre's foundation in 1566.</note> a good and learned man, and a Catholic in mind
and heart. There however I did not stay more than a twelvemonth,
as at Easter the heretics sought to force us to attend their
worship, and to partake of their counterfeit sacrament. I returned
then with my brother to my father's house, whither Mr. Leutner
himself soon followed us, being resolved to live as a Catholic in
very deed, and not merely in desire. While there, he superintended
our Latin studies for the next two years, but afterwards
going to Belgium, he lived and died there most holily. As for
Greek, we were at the same time placed under the tuition of a
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
good and pious Priest, William Sutton by name, to whom this
occupation served as an occasion for dwelling in our house
unmolested. He afterwards entered the Society, and was drowned
on the coast of Spain, whither Superiors had called him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At the age of nineteen I passed over to France, by permission,
with the object of learning the French tongue, and
resided for three years at Rhemes. While there, though yet a lad,
and far from being solidly grounded in my Humanities, I applied
myself to the study of Sacred Scripture, consulting the commentators
for the sense of the more difficult passages, and writing
down with my own hand the explanations given publicly to the
theological students. Being my own master, I did not, as I
ought to have done, lay a sufficiently solid foundation. My own
taste guided my choice of authors, and I sedulously read the
works of St. Bernard and St. Bonaventure, and such other spiritual
writers. About this time I made, by God's providence, the
acquaintance of a saintly young man, who had been admitted into
the Society at Rome, but having for reasons of health been sent
out for a time, was then living at Rhemes. He gave me the
details of his past life; he told me (may the Lord reward him)
how he had been educated in the household of God; he taught
me how good and wholesome it was for a man to have borne the
yoke from his youth. He taught me the method of mental prayer;
for which exercise we were wont to meet together at stated hours,
as we were not living in the College, but in different lodgings in
the town. It was there that, when about twenty years of age,
I heard the call of God's infinite mercy and loving kindness
inviting me from the crooked ways of the world to the straight
path, to the perfect following of Christ in His holy Society.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After my three years' residence at Rhemes, I went to
Clermont College, at Paris, to see more closely the manner of the
Society's life, and to be more solidly grounded in Humanities and
Philosophy. I had not been there one year, when I fell dangerously
ill. After my recovery, I accompanied Father Thomas
Darbyshire to Rouen, in order to see Father Persons, who had
arrived thither from England, and was staying incognito in that
city, to superintend the publication of his <hi rend='italic'>Christian Directory</hi>, a
most useful and happy work, which in my opinion has converted to
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
God more souls than it contains pages. The heretics themselves
have known how to appreciate it, as appears from a recent edition
thereof published by one of their ministers, who sought to claim
the glory of so important a work. To Father Persons then did I
communicate my vocation, and my desire of joining the Society.
But as I was not yet strong, nor fit to continue my studies, and,
moreover, as I had some property to dispose of and arrangements
to make in England, he advised me to return thither, so as to
recruit my health by breathing my native air, and at the same
time to free myself from every obstacle which might prevent or
delay me in my pursuit of perfection and the Religious life. I
accordingly went home, and after settling my affairs, set out on
my return, in about a year; this time, however, without having
asked for a license, for I had no hope of obtaining it, as I did not
venture to communicate my plans to my parents.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I embarked then with some other Catholics, and after having
been kept five days at sea by contrary winds, we were forced to
put in at the port of Dover. On arriving thither, we were all
seized by the Custom House officers, and forwarded to London in
custody. My companions were imprisoned, on a warrant of the
Queen's Privy Council. For my own part, though I declared
myself a Catholic, and refused to attend their worship, I escaped
imprisonment at that time, as there were some of the Council that
were friendly to my family, and had procured me the license to
travel abroad on the former occasion. They entertained, it would
seem, some hopes of perverting me in course of time, so I was
sent to my maternal uncle's, a Protestant, to be kept in his
custody, and if possible, to be perverted. He, after three months,
sought to obtain my full liberty by praying or paying;<note place='foot'>Prece vel pretio (MS.).</note> but
being asked whether I had <hi rend='italic'>gone to church</hi>, as they call it, he was
obliged to acknowledge that he could never bring me to do so.
Thereupon the Council sent me with a letter to the pseudo-Bishop
of London,<note place='foot'>John Elmer, Bishop of London from 1576 to 1588.</note> who having read it, asked whether I would
allow him to confer with me on religious matters. I replied, that
as I doubted of nothing, I had rather decline. <q>You must in that
case,</q> answered the Superintendent, <q>remain here in custody.</q> I
<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>
replied that in this I was obliged to acquiesce, through force and
the command of the Government. He treated me with kindness,
with a view perhaps of thus drawing me over. But he ordered his
chaplain's bed to be brought into my chamber. At first I repeatedly
declared my determination not to enter into any dispute
with this man on matters of faith, as to which my mind was
settled, nor to receive religious instruction from him; but as he
ceased not pouring forth abuse and blasphemy against the Saints
in Heaven, and against our Holy Mother the Church, I was
forced to defend the truth, and then almost the whole night was
spent in disputing. I soon discovered that in him at least God's
truth had no very formidable adversary. After two days, as they
saw my case was hopeless, they sent me back to the Council with
letters of recommendation forsooth, for the so-called Bishop told
me that he had greatly striven in my favour, and that he had great
hopes of my being set at large. It was, however, a Uriah's letter
that I carried, for no sooner had the Council read it, than they
ordered me to be imprisoned until I had learnt to be a loyal
subject. For they hold him a bad subject who will not subject
himself to their heresies and their sacrilegious worship.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Being committed to the Marshalsea prison, I found there
numbers of Catholics and some Priests<note place='foot'>There were 47 Catholics in the prison, of whom 11 were Priests, amongst
whom were William Hartley and John Adams, future martyrs, and William
Bishop, the first Vicar Apostolic (P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 170, n. 11).</note> awaiting judgment of
death with the greatest joy. In this school of Christ I was
detained from the beginning of one Lent</q> [March 5, 1584]
<q>to the end of the following, not without abundant consolation
of mind, and good opportunity for study.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Twice during this interval we were all dragged before the
Courts, not to be tried for our lives, but to be fined according
to the law against recusants. I was condemned to pay 2,000
florins [200<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>].<note place='foot'>In a letter dated October 3, 1614 (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, iv., 24),
Father Gerard says that <q>7 florins of Liége make but 6 of Brabant, 12s.
English.</q> So we may turn his florins into pounds by taking off the last cypher.</note> The Court was held in the country, some six
miles out of London....</q><note place='foot'>Another occasion may present itself for placing before the reader the
many anecdotes of the English Martyrs related in the Autobiography, that are
now passed over.</note>
</p>

<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At times our cells were visited, and a strict search made for
church stuff, Agnus Dei, and relics. Once we were, almost all
of us, betrayed by a false brother, who had feigned to be a
Catholic, and disclosed our hidden stores to the authorities. On
this occasion were seized quantities of Catholic books and sacred
objects, enough to fill a cart. In my cell were found nearly all
the requisites for saying Mass: for my next-door neighbour was
a good Priest, and we discovered a secret way of opening the
door between us so that we had Mass very early every morning.
We afterwards repaired our losses, nor could the malice of the
devil again deprive us of so great a consolation in our bonds.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the course of the following year, my liberty was obtained
by the importunities of my friends, who however were bound as
sureties, to the extent of a heavy sum of money, for my remaining
in the kingdom. I was, moreover, to present myself at the
prison at the three months' end. And these sureties had to be
renewed three or four times before I was able to resume my
project. At length the long-wished-for opportunity presented
itself. A very dear friend of mine offered himself as bail to meet
whatever demand might be made, if I was discovered to be
missing after the appointed time. After my departure, he forfeited
not indeed his money, but his life: for he was one of the most
conspicuous of those fourteen gentlemen who suffered in connection
with the captive Queen of Scots, and whose execution, as
events soon showed, was but a prelude to taking off the Queen
herself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Being at length free, I went to Paris;<note place='foot'>Father Gerard was present, he says, at the martyrdom of William
Thomson, who suffered at Tyburn, April 20, 1586. Father Holt became
Rector of the English College at Rome, October 24, 1586; and the name of
John Gerard is the first entry for 1587 in the College Catalogue.</note> and finding Father
William Holt, who had just arrived from Scotland, ready to start
for Rome with the Provincial of France, I joined myself to their
company. At Rome I was advised to pursue my studies in the
English College, and to take Priest's Orders before I entered
the Society. I followed this advice, despite my ardent desire
of entering Religion, which I communicated to Father Persons,
and to Father Holt, the then Rector of the English College.
<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>
But as the Roman climate was not suited to my constitution,
and I had an extreme desire of going to England, it seemed
good to the Fathers to put me at the beginning of the year
to casuistry and controversies; I went therefore through a complete
course of Positive Theology. Towards its close, when
the Spanish Armada was nearing the coasts of England, Cardinal
Allen thought fit to send me to England for various matters
connected with Catholic interests, but as I still wanted several
months of the lawful age for taking Priest's Orders, a Papal
dispensation was obtained. I was most unwilling to depart unless
I was first admitted into the Society, so Father Persons, out of
his singular charity towards me, obtained my admission to the
Novitiate, which I was to finish in England. There were at that
time in the English College some others who had the like
vocation, and we used to strive to conform ourselves as much as
possible to the Novices at St. Andrew's, serving in the kitchen,
and visiting hospitals. On the Feast of the Assumption of the
Most Blessed Virgin Mary, 1588, our Very Rev. Father General
Aquaviva received Father Edward Ouldcorne of blessed memory
and my unworthy self into the Society of Jesus, and gave us his
blessing for the English Mission.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<p>
<q>I started then on my homeward journey,<note place='foot'>When Father Gerard has occasion, in his Narrative of the Powder Plot,
to relate what he knows of Father Ouldcorne's history, he gives an account
of this journey (<hi rend='italic'>infr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>).</note> in company with
Father Ouldcorne and two other Priests who had been students
at the English College.</q>... <q>As we passed through Rhemes,
where there was an English Seminary, and through Paris, we
kept the strictest incognito.</q>
</p>

<p>
Father Gerard's passing through Paris was not as little known
as he thought, and without being aware of it, he then fell into
the gravest of the perils that beset the poor Catholics of England,
the <q>perils from false brethren.</q> Gilbert Gifford, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Jacques
Colerdin, <q>an English Priest and Bachelor in Theology,</q> as he
describes himself in his petition<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi> vol. 217, n. 81.</note> to the Archbishop of Paris for
<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>
liberation from his prison in Paris, was one of Sir Francis
Walsyngham's most copious correspondents. He had been
arrested for Babington's conspiracy, and turned spy to save his
life. He had a pension<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 199, nn. 95, 96.</note> from Walsyngham of 100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a-year for his
treachery, the suspicion of which caused his imprisonment.
Apparently from his prison, he found means to write a letter<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid</hi>, vol. 217, n. 3. The Calendar gives for its date Oct. 1, 1588. The
postscript of the letter bears the date <q>8 Septembris.</q></note> to
his employers, in which the following sentence occurs: <q>There
be 8 Priests over from Rome, whereof John Gerard and Arthur
Shefford a Priest, and his man, will be in England within five days.</q>
</p>

<p>
In all unconsciousness Father Gerard proceeds: <q rend='pre'>At length
we came to Eu, where a College for English youths had been
established, which was afterwards abandoned on account of
the wars, and another more extensive establishment erected at
St. Omers. Our Fathers at Eu, after conferring with those
who had the management of the College in that town, all
strongly opposed our venturing into England as circumstances
then were, for that the Spanish attempt had exasperated the
public mind against Catholics, and most rigid searches and
domiciliary visits had been set on foot; that guards were posted
in every village along the roads and streets; that the Earl of
Leicester, then at the height of his favour, had sworn not to
leave a single Catholic alive at the close of the year, but this
man of blood did not live out half his days, for he was cut off
in that very same year. We were compelled then to stay there
for a time, until fresh instructions were sent us by Father Persons
in the name of Father General. They were to this effect, that
the state of affairs had indeed much changed since our departure
from Rome, but that, as it was the Lord's business that we had to
do, he left us free either to wait the return of greater calm or to
pursue the course we had entered upon. On receiving this
desirable message we did not long deliberate, but immediately
hired a ship to land us in the northern part of England, which
seemed to be less disturbed. Two Priests from Rhemes joined
us, as our former companions preferred to take time before they
faced the dangers which awaited them on the opposite shores.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xviii'/><anchor id='Pgxviii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The ship then set sail with four Priests on board, a goodly
cargo indeed, had not my unworthiness deprived me of the crown,
for all those other three suffered martyrdom for the faith. The
two Priests were soon taken, and being in a short space made
perfect, they fulfilled a long time. Their names were Christopher
Bales and George Beesley,<note place='foot'>They both suffered in Fleet Street; Christopher Bales on March 4, 1590,
and George Beesley on July 2, 1591. They were condemned under the statute
27 Elizabeth, for being made Priests beyond the seas and exercising their
functions in England.</note> but my companion, the blessed
Father Ouldcorne, after having spent eighteen years of toil and
labour in the Lord's vineyard, watered it at length with his blood.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After crossing the Channel, as we were sailing along the
English coast on the third day, my companion and I, seeing
a convenient spot in which the ship's boat might easily set us on
shore, and considering that it were dangerous if we were to land
all together, recommended the matter to God and took counsel
with our companions. We then ordered the ship to anchor
until dark, and in the first watch we were put ashore in the
boat and left there, whereupon the ship immediately set sail
and departed. We remained there awhile commending ourselves
in prayer to God's providence; then we sought out some path
which might lead us further inland, at a greater distance from the
sea, before the day should dawn. But the night being dark and
cloudy we could not strike out any path that would lead us to the
open country, but every way we tried always brought us to some
dwelling, as we were made aware by the barking of the dogs.
As this happened some two or three times we began to fear lest
we might rouse some of the inhabitants, and be seized upon as
thieves or burglars. We therefore turned into a neighbouring
wood, where we proposed to rest during the night. But the rain
and the cold (for it was about the end of October) rendered sleep
impossible, nor did we dare to speak aloud to one another, as the
wood was in the neighbourhood of a house, but we deliberated in
whispers whether to set out together for London or to part
company, so that if one were taken the other might escape.
Having pondered the reasons on both sides, we determined to
set forth each by himself, and to take different routes.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>

<p>
<q>At day-dawn, then, we cast lots who should first leave the
wood, and the lot fell on the good Father who was also the first
to leave this world for Heaven. We then made an equal division
of what money we had, and after embracing and receiving one
from the other a blessing, the future martyr went along the
sea-shore to a neighbouring town, where he fell in with some
sailors who were thinking of going to London. Being prudent
and cautious, he strove by cheerfulness to accommodate himself
to their humours in indifferent things. But twice or thrice he
could not withhold from reproving their coarse and filthy
language, though he imperilled himself by so doing, as he
afterwards told me.</q>... <q rend='pre'>Evil as they were, he did not so
displease them, but that, by their means, and the protection they
unwittingly afforded, he was enabled to reach London without
molestation; for the watchers, who were in almost every town
through which he passed, taking him to be one of the party, cared
not to annoy those whose appearance and carriage distinguished
them so completely from those for whom they were keeping
watch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When my companion had departed, I too set out, but by a
different road. I had not gone far before I saw some country
folks coming towards me. I went up to them and inquired about
a stray falcon, whether they had heard the tinkling of his bells.
For I wanted them to think that I had lost a falcon, and was
going through the country in search of it, as is usual with those
who have sustained such a loss, so that they might not wonder
why I was strange to the country and had to ask my way. They
of course had neither seen nor heard any such thing of late, and
seemed sorry that they could not direct my search. I then went
with a disappointed air to examine the neighbouring trees and
hedges, as if to look for my bird. Thus I was able, without
awakening suspicion, to keep clear of the highway, and to get
further and further from the sea-shore by going across country.
Whenever I saw any one in a field I went up to him and put the
same series of questions about the falcon, concealing thereby my
anxiety to keep out of the public roads and villages, where I
knew sentinels were posted with power to examine every
stranger. I thus managed to expend the best part of that day,
<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>
walking some eight or ten miles, not in a straight line, but by
doubling and returning frequently on my steps. At length, being
quite soaked with rain and exhausted with hunger and fatigue,
for I had scarcely been able to take any food or rest on board
ship for the tossing of the waves, I turned into a village inn
which lay in my road, for those who go to the inns are less liable
to be questioned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There I refreshed myself well, and found mine host very
agreeable, especially as I wanted to buy a pony he had in his
stable. I concluded the bargain at a reasonable price, for the
owner was not very rich, but I took it as a means of more speedy
and safer transit, for foot-passengers are frequently looked upon
as vagrants, and even in quiet times are liable to arrest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Next morning I mounted my pony and turned towards
Norwich, the capital of that county. I had scarcely ridden two
miles when I fell in with the watchers at the entrance of a
village, who bade me halt and began to ask me who I was and
whence I came. I told them that I was the servant of a certain
lord who lived in a neighbouring county (with whom I was well
acquainted, though he was unknown to them), that my falcon
had flown away, and that I had come to this part of the country
to recover him if he should have been found. They found no
flaw in my story, yet they would not let me go, but said I must
be brought before the constable and the beadle,<note place='foot'>Ad subcuratorem pacis, et ad censorem (MS.). The above are conjectural
renderings. These seem to have been only village officials.</note> who were both
in church at the time, at their profane heretical service. I saw
that I could neither fly nor resist, nor could I prevail with these
men, so, yielding to necessity, I went with them as far as the
churchyard. One of the party entered the church and brought
word that the beadle wished me to come into the church, and
that he would see me when service was over. I replied that I
would wait for him where I was. <q>No, no,</q> said the messenger,
<q>you must go into the church.</q> <q>I shall stop here,</q> I returned,
<q>I do not want to lose sight of my horse.</q> <q>What!</q> said the
man, <q>you won't dismount to go and hear the Word of God!
I can only warn you that you will make no very favourable
impression; as to your horse, I myself will engage to get you a
<pb n='xxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxi'/>
better one, if you are so anxious about him.</q> <q>Go and tell
him,</q> said I, <q>that if he wants me, either he must come at once
or I will wait here.</q> As soon as my message was taken to him,
the beadle came out with some others to examine me. I could
easily see he was not best pleased. He began by demanding
whence I came. I answered by naming certain places which I
had learnt were not far off. To his questions as to my name,
condition, dwelling, and business, I made the same answers as
above. He then asked whether I had any letters with me, on
which I offered to allow him to search my person. This he did
not do, but said he should be obliged to take me before the
Justice of the Peace.<note place='foot'>Irenarchâ aut curatore pacis (MS.).</note> I professed my readiness to go, should he
deem it needful, but that I was in a hurry to get back to my
master after my long absence, so that if it could be managed I
should be better pleased to be allowed to go on. At first he
stood to his resolution, and I saw nothing for it but to go before
the Justice and to be committed to gaol, as doubtless would have
been the case. But suddenly looking at me with a calmer
countenance, he said, <q>You look like an honest man: go on in
God's name, I do not want to trouble you any more.</q> Nor did
God's providence abandon me in my further journey. As I rode
onward towards the town, I saw a young man on horseback with a
pack riding on before me. I wanted to come up with him, so as
to get information about the state of the town, and ask the fittest
inn for me to put up at, and he looked like one of whom I could
make such inquiries without exciting suspicion; but his horse
being better than mine I could not gain upon him, urge my pony
how I would. After following him at a distance for two or three
miles, it chanced by God's will that he dropped his pack, and was
obliged to dismount in order to pick it up and strap it on. As I
came up I found he was an unpolished youth, well fitted for my
purpose. From him I acquired information that would have
been very useful had any danger befallen, but, as it was, by his
means the Lord so guided me, that I escaped all danger. For I
inquired about a good inn near the city gate, that I might not
weary my horse in going from street to street in search of one.
He told me there was such an inn on the other side of the city;
<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>
but that if I wanted to put up there I must go round the town.
Having learnt the way thereto and the sign of the house, I
thanked my informant, and left him to pursue his road, which
led straight through the town, the same way I should have
followed had I not met with such a guide, and in that case I
should have run into certain danger, nor would any of those
things have befallen which afterwards came to pass for God's
greater glory and the salvation of many souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Following then the advice of the young man, I went round
the skirts of the city to the gate he had described, and as soon as
I entered I saw my inn. I had rested me but a little while there,
when a man who seemed to be an acquaintance of the people of
the house came in. After greeting me civilly, he sat down in the
chimney corner, and dropped some words about some Catholic
gentlemen who were kept in gaol there; and he mentioned one
whose relative had been a companion of mine in the Marshalsea
some seven years since. I silently noted his words, and when he
had gone out, I asked who he might be. They answered that he
was a very honest fellow in other points, but a Papist. I inquired
how they came to know that. They replied that it was a well-known
fact, as he had been many years imprisoned in the Castle
there (which was but a stone's throw from where I was); that
many Catholic gentlemen were confined there, and that he had
been but lately let out. I asked whether he had abandoned the
Faith in order to be at large. <q>No indeed,</q> said they, <q>nor is he
likely to, for he is a most obstinate man. But he has been set
free under an engagement to come back to prison, when called
for. He has some business with a gentleman in the prison, and
he comes here pretty often, on that account.</q> I held my tongue,
and awaited his return. As soon as he came back, and we were
alone, I told him I should wish to speak with him apart, that I
had heard that he was a Catholic, and for that reason I trusted
him, as I also was a Catholic: that I had come there by a sort of
chance, but wanted to get on to London: that it would be a good
deed worthy of a Catholic, were he to do me the favour of introducing
me to some parties who might be going the same road,
and who were well known, so that I might be allowed to pass on
by favour of their company: that being able to pay my expenses,
<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>
I should be no burden to my companions. He replied that he
knew not of any one who was then going to London. I hereon
inquired if he could hire a person who would accompany me for a
set price. He said he would look out some such one, but that
he knew of a gentleman then in the town, who might be able to
forward my business. He went to find him, and soon returning
desired me to accompany him. He took me into a shop, as if he
were going to make some purchase. The gentleman he had
mentioned was there, having appointed the place that he might
see me before he made himself known. At length he joined us,
and told my companion in a whisper that he believed I was a
Priest. He led us therefore to the cathedral, and having put me
many questions, he at last urged me to say whether or no I was
a Priest, promising that he would assist me, at that time a most
acceptable offer. On my side, I inquired from my previous
acquaintance the name and condition of this party; and on
learning it, as I saw God's providence in so ready an assistance,
I told him I was a Priest of the Society, who had come from
Rome. He performed his promise, and procured for me a change
of clothes, and made me mount a good horse, and took me
without delay into the country to the house of a personal friend,
leaving one of his servants to bring on my little pony. The next
day we arrived at his house, where he and his family resided,
together with a brother of his who was a heretic. They had with
them a widowed sister, also a heretic, who kept house for them;
so that I was obliged to be careful not to give any ground for
them to suspect my calling. The heretic brother at my first
coming was somewhat suspicious, seeing me arrive in his Catholic
brother's company unknown as I was, and perceiving no reason
why the latter should make so much of me. But after a day or
so, he quite abandoned all mistrust, as I spoke of hunting and
falconry with all the details that none but a practised person could
command. For many make sad blunders in attempting this, as
Father Southwell, who was afterwards my companion in many
journeys, was wont to complain. He frequently got me to instruct
him in the technical terms of sport, and used to complain of his
bad memory for such things, for on many occasions when he fell
in with Protestant gentlemen, he found it necessary to speak of
<pb n='xxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxiv'/>
these matters, which are the sole topics of their conversation, save
when they talk obscenity, or break out into blasphemies and abuse
of the Saints or the Catholic faith. In these cases it is of course
desirable to turn the conversation to other subjects, and to speak
of horses, of hounds, and such like. Thus it often happens that
trifling covers truth,<note place='foot'>Ut vanitas veritatem occultet (MS.).</note> as it did with me on this occasion. After a
short sojourn of a few days, I proposed to my newly-found friend,
the Catholic brother, my intention of going to London, to meet
my Superior. He therefore provided me with a horse, and sent a
servant along with me; begging me at the same time to obtain
leave to return to that county, and to make his house my home,
for he assured me that I should bring over many to the faith, were
I to converse with them publicly as he had seen me do. I
pledged myself to lay his offer before Father Garnett, and said
that I would willingly return if he should approve of it. So I
departed, and arrived in London without accident, having met
with no obstacle on the road. I have gone into these particulars,
to show how God's providence guarded me on my first landing in
England; for without knowing a single soul in that county, where
until then I had never set foot, as it was far distant from my
native place, on the very first day I found a friend who not only
saved me from present peril, but who afterwards, by introducing
me to the principal families in the county, furnished an opportunity
for many conversions; and from the acquaintance I then
made, and the knowledge the Catholics in those parts had of me
in consequence, all that God chose hereafter to do by my weakness
took its origin, as will appear by the sequel.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>III.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On my arrival in London, by the help of certain Catholics I
discovered Father Henry Garnett, who was then Superior. Besides
him, the only others of our Society then in England were Father
Edmund Weston,<note place='foot'>Father William Weston, commonly called Father Edmonds.</note> confined at Wisbech (who, had he been at
large, would have been Superior), Father Robert Southwell, and
we two new-comers.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My companion, Father Ouldcorne, had already arrived, so the
Superior was rather anxious on my account, as nothing had been
heard of me; but yet for that very reason hopes were entertained
of my safety. It was with exceeding joy on both sides that we
met at last. I stayed some time with the Fathers, and we held
frequent consultations as to our future proceedings. The good
Superior gave us excellent instructions as to the method of
helping and gaining souls, as did also Father Southwell, who
much excelled in that art, being at once prudent, pious, meek,
and exceedingly winning. As Christmas was nigh at hand, it was
necessary to separate, both for the consolation of the Faithful, and
because the dangers are always greater in the great solemnities.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I was then sent back to my friend in the county where I was
first set ashore. This time the Superior provided me with clothes
and other necessaries, that I might not be a burden to my charitable
host at the outset. But afterwards, throughout the whole period
of my missionary labours, the fatherly providence of God supplied
both for me and for some others. My dress was of the same
fashion as that of gentlemen of moderate means. The necessity
of this was shown by reason and subsequent events; for, from my
former position, I was more at ease in this costume, and could
maintain a less embarrassed bearing, than if I had assumed a
character to which I was unaccustomed. Then, too, I had to
appear in public and meet many Protestant gentlemen, with
whom I could not have held communication with a view to lead
them on to a love of the Faith and a desire of virtue, had I not
adopted this garb. I found it helped me, not only to speak more
freely and with greater authority, but to remain with greater safety,
and for a longer interval of time, in any place or family to which
my host introduced me as his friend and acquaintance.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus it happened that I remained for six or eight months,
with some profit to souls, in the family of my first friend and
host; during which time, he took me with him to nearly every
gentleman's house in the county. Before the eight months were
passed, I gained over and converted many to the Church: among
whom were my host's brother, his brother-in-law, and his two
sisters; one of these, as I have before mentioned, was my friend's
housekeeper, and had been all along a notable Calvinist.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxvi'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I reconciled, moreover, the sister of a Judge<note place='foot'>The name <q>Yelverton</q> is added in the margin. Sir Christopher
Yelverton was at this time Queen's Serjeant, and subsequently Speaker of the
House of Commons, and Puisne Judge of the King's Bench. He died in
1607. His son, Sir Henry Yelverton, Judge of the Court of Common Pleas,
condemned Father Edmund Arrowsmith in 1628, and died in the January
following.</note> who even now
is the most firm support of the Calvinist party. This lady,
having been brought up in his house, had been strongly imbued
with this heresy. A very remarkable thing had happened to her
some time previously. Being very anxious as to the state of her
soul, she went to a certain Doctor of the University of Cambridge,
of the name of Perne,<note place='foot'>Dr. Andrew Perne, Master of Peter-house, Cambridge, and second Dean
of Ely. He is incidentally mentioned by Miss Strickland as having changed
his religion four times (<hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Queens of England</hi>, vol. vii., p. 208).</note> who she knew had changed his religion
some three or four times under different sovereigns, but yet was
in high repute for learning. Going to this Dr. Perne, then, who
was an intimate friend of her family, she conjured him to tell
her honestly and undisguisedly what was the sound orthodox faith
whereby she might attain Heaven. The Doctor, finding himself
thus earnestly appealed to by a woman of discretion and good
sense, replied: <q>I conjure you never to disclose to another what
I am going to say. Since, then, you have pressed me to answer
as if I had to give an account of your soul, I will tell you, that
you can, if you please, <emph>live</emph> in the religion now professed by the
Queen and her whole kingdom, for so you will live more at ease,
and be exempt from all the vexations the Catholics have to
undergo. But by no means <emph>die</emph> out of the faith and communion
of the Catholic Church, if you would save your soul.</q> Such was
the answer of this poor man, but such was not his practice; for,
putting off his conversion from day to day, it fell out that, when
he least expected, on his return home from dining with the
pseudo-Archbishop of Canterbury, he dropped down dead as he
was entering his apartment, without the least sign of repentance,
or of Christian hope of that eternal bliss which he had too easily
promised to himself and to others after a life of a contrary
tendency. She to whom he gave the above-mentioned advice
was more fortunate than he, and though she at first by no means
accepted his estimate of the Catholic faith, yet later on, having
<pb n='xxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxvii'/>
frequently heard from me that the Catholic faith alone was true
and holy, she began to have doubts, and in consequence brought
me an heretical work which had served to confirm her in her
heresy, and showed me the various arguments it contained. I,
on the other hand, pointed out to her the quibbles, the dishonest
quotations from Scripture and the Fathers, and the misstatement
of facts which the book contained. And so, by God's grace, from
the scorpion itself was drawn the remedy against the scorpion's
sting, and she has lived ever since constant in her profession of
the Catholic faith to which she then returned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I must not omit mentioning an instance of the wonderful
efficacy of the Sacraments as shown in the case of the married
sister of my host. She had married a man of high rank, and
being favourably inclined to the Church, she had been so well
prepared by her brother, that it cost me but little labour to make
her a child of the Catholic Church. After her conversion she
endured much from her husband when he found that she refused
to join in heretical worship, but her patience withstood and
overcame all. It happened on one occasion that she was so
exhausted after a difficult and dangerous labour, that her life was
despaired of. A clever physician was at once brought from
Cambridge, who on seeing her said that he could indeed give
her medicine, but that he could give no hopes of her recovery;
and having prescribed some remedies, he left. I was at that time
on a visit to the house, having come, as was my wont, in company
with her brother. The master of the house was glad to see us,
although he well knew we were Catholics, and used in fact to
confer with me on religious subjects. I had nearly convinced
his understanding and judgment, but the will was rooted to the
earth, <q>for he had great possessions.</q> But being anxious for his
wife, whom he dearly loved, he allowed his brother to persuade
him, as there was no longer any hope for her present life, to allow
her all freedom to prepare for the one to come. With his
permission, then, we promised to bring in an old Priest on the
following night: for those Priests who were ordained before
Elizabeth's reign were not exposed to such dangers and penalties
as the others. We therefore made use of his ministry, in order
that this lady might receive all the rites of the Church. Having
<pb n='xxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxviii'/>
made her confession and been anointed with great devotion,
she received the Holy Viaticum; and behold in half an
hour's time she so far recovered, as to be wholly out of
danger; the disease and its cause had vanished, and she
had only to recover her strength. The husband seeing his
wife thus snatched from the jaws of death, wished to know
the reason. We told him that it was one of the effects of
the holy Sacrament of Extreme Unction, that it restored bodily
health when Divine Wisdom saw that it was expedient for the
good of the soul. This was the cause of his conversion; for
admiring the power and efficacy of the Sacraments of the true
Church, he allowed himself to be persuaded to seek in that
Church the health of his own soul. I, being eager to strike the
iron while it was hot, began without delay to prepare him for
confession; but not wishing just then that he should know me for
a Priest, I said that I would instruct him as I had been instructed
by Priests in my time. He prepared himself, and awaited the
Priest's arrival. His brother-in-law told him that this must be at
night time. So, having sent away the servants who used to attend
him to his chamber, he went into the library, where I left him
praying, telling him that I would return directly with the Priest. I
went downstairs and put on my soutane, and returned so changed
in appearance, that he, never dreaming of any such thing, was
speechless with amazement. My friend and I showed him that
our conduct was necessary, not so much in order to avoid danger,
but in order to cheat the devil and to snatch souls from his
clutches. He well knew, I said, that I could in no other way
converse with him and his equals, and without conversation it
was impossible to bring round those who were so ill-disposed.
The same considerations served to dispel all anxieties as to the
consequence of my sojourn under his roof. I appealed to his own
experience, and reminded him, that though I had been in continual
contact with him, he had not once suspected my priestly
character. He thus became a Catholic; and his lady, grateful to
God for this two-fold blessing, perseveres still in the Faith, and
has endured much since that time from the hands of heretics.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Besides these, I reconciled to the Church, during the period
of my appearance in public, more than twenty fathers and
<pb n='xxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxix'/>
mothers of families, equal, and some even superior, in station to
the above mentioned. For prudence sake I omit their names.
As for poor persons and servants, I received a great many; the
exact number I do not remember.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After some six or seven months, I received a visit from a
Catholic gentleman of another county, a relative of one of my
spiritual children, who was very desirous to make acquaintance
with a Jesuit. He was a devout young man, and heir to a pretty
considerable estate, one half of which came into his possession by
his brother's death, the other portion being held for life by his
mother, who was a good Catholic widow lady. Her son lived
with her, and they kept a Priest in the house. He had then sold
a portion of his estate, and devoted the proceeds to pious uses,
for he was fervent and full of charity. After the lapse of a few
days, as I saw his aspiration to a higher life and his desires of
perfection wax stronger, I told him that there were certain
spiritual exercises, by means of which a well-disposed person
could discover a short road to perfection, and be best prepared to
make choice of a state of life. He most earnestly begged to be
allowed to make them. I acceded to his request, and he made
great spiritual profit thereby, not only in that he made the best
choice, which was that he would enter the Society of Jesus as
soon as possible, but also because he made the best and most
proper arrangements to carry his purpose into execution, and to
preserve meanwhile his present fervour. After his retreat he
expressed the greatest wish that I should come and live with him,
and I had no rest until I promised to submit the matter to my
Superior. For my own part, I could not but reflect that my
present public mode of life, though in the beginning it had its
advantages, could not be long continued, because the more
people I knew and the more I was known to, the less became my
safety, and the greater my distractions. Hence it was not without
acknowledging God's special providence that I heard him make
me this invitation. So, after having consulted with my Superior,
and obtained his permission to accept the offer, I bade adieu to
my old friends, and stationed a Priest where they might conveniently
have recourse to his ministry. He still remains there, to
the great profit of souls, though in the endurance of many perils.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xxx'/><anchor id='Pgxxx'/>

<p>
<q>In my new abode, I was able to live much more quietly and
more to my taste, inasmuch as nearly all the members of the house
were Catholics; and thus it was easier for me to conform to the
manner of life of the Society, both as regards dress and the
arrangement of my time.... While in this residence (and I
was there all but two years) I gave much time to my studies. At
times I made missionary excursions, and not only did I reconcile
many, but I confirmed some Catholic families in the Faith, and
placed two Priests in stations where they might be useful to souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
Amongst those to whom Father Gerard gave the Spiritual
Exercises while in this residence, were two brothers of the name
of Wiseman, who entered the Novitiate of St. Andrew at Rome
<q>under the names of Starkie and Standish, which they assumed,</q>
says Father Gerard, <q>as a remembrance of me; for under these
I passed in the first and second county where I took up my
residence.</q> The one died there, and the other at St. Omers, not
long after. Their eldest brother was William Wiseman, of Braddocks,
or Broadoaks, a family mansion<note place='foot'><q>It [Braddocks] seems to have been formerly moated round, and two
sides of the moat remain at present</q> (Morant, <hi rend='italic'>History of Essex</hi>, London,
1768, vol ii., p. 559).</note> which stands in the fields
two miles from Wimbish Church, in Essex. <q>He had lately come
to his estate on the death of his father, and had made himself a
large deer park in it. There he lived like a little king, in ease and
independence, surrounded by his children, to whom, as well as to
his wife, he was tenderly attached. As he kept clear of Priests
from the Seminaries, he lived unmolested, feeling nothing of the
burden and heat of the day; for the persecutors troubled chiefly
those who harboured the Seminarists, not caring to inquire after
those who kept the old Priests, that is, those who had taken Orders
before the reign of Elizabeth.... In his house there was
living my host's mother, a most excellent widow lady, happy in
her children, but still happier in her private virtues. She had
four sons and four daughters. These latter, without exception,
devoted their virginity to God. Two had already joined the holy
Order of St. Bridget before my arrival,</q> Ann and Barbara;<note place='foot'>Their names appear in 1580, among the signatures of the thirty Nuns of
Sion, then at Rouen, in a petition to the Catholics of England, praying them
not to allow <q>the only Religious Convent remaining of our country</q> to perish
for want of support (Public Record Office, <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 146, n. 114).
The convent reached Lisbon in 1594, and in 1863 returned to England and
settled at Spetisbury, near Blandford. It is the only Religious House in
England that can trace an unbroken descent from a foundation made before
the Reformation. Sion House was founded by Henry V. in 1413.</note> <q>and
<pb n='xxxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxi'/>
one of these,</q> Barbara, <q>is even at this day Abbess in Lisbon. I
sent the two others,</q> Jane and Bridget <q>to Flanders, where they
still serve God in the Order of St. Augustine at Louvain. Her
sons were all pious young men; two,</q> Thomas and John, <q>died in
the Society, as was related above; the third,</q> Robert, <q>chose the
army, and was lately slain in a battle with the heretics in Belgium;
he fell fighting when many around him had surrendered; the
fourth,</q> William,<note place='foot'>William is said to have been knighted at a later date. Three baronetcies
were conferred on various branches of the family, William of Canfield (1628),
Richard of Thundersley (1628), and Sir William Wiseman, Knight, of Riverhall
(1660). The two last mentioned are extinct. The Wisemans of Braddocks
were descended from John Wiseman, Esq., ancestor of the present baronet,
who purchased the estate in Northend about 1430, and was the first of the
family who lived in Essex.</note> who married Jane, daughter of Sir Edmund
Huddleston, Knight, <q>was the master of that house, who to his
mother's great joy, had given himself up to every good work.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Wiseman, or <q>the Widow Wiseman,</q> as it seems more
natural to call her, had a house of her own at Northend in the
parish of Great Waltham, which had been in possession of the
family since the time of Henry VI. On Father Gerard's recommendation
she went to live there, and maintained a Priest, <q>in
order that so noble a soul, and one so ready for all good deeds,
might be a profit not only to herself but to many, as in fact
she became. Her house was a retreat and no small protection
both to ours and to other Priests.</q> This valiant Catholic woman
and her brave son were in bad repute with the persecuting
authorities, and the Public Record Office preserves many reports
respecting them. In January, 1594, Justice Young writes to Lord
Keeper Puckering,<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 247, n. 3.</note> <q>Mrs. Jane Wiseman her house is the only
resort for these wicked persons. She was at Wisbech with the
Seminaries and Jesuits there, and she did repent that she had not
gone bare-footed thither, and she is a great reliever of them, and
she made a rich vestment and sent it them, as your Lordship
doth remember as I think, when you and my Lord of Buckhurst
<pb n='xxxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxii'/>
sent to Wisbech to search, for that I had letters which did
decypher all her doings.</q> She was condemned in 1598 to the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>peine forte et dure</foreign> for refusing to plead when indicted for
harbouring Father Jones, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Buckley, the Franciscan martyr.
<q>However, on account of her rank and the good name which
she had, the Queen's councillors would not let such barbarity be
practised in London. So they transferred her after her condemnation
to a more loathsome prison, and kept her there. They
wanted at the same time to seize her income for the Queen.
Now if she had been dead, this income would not have gone to
the Queen, but to the widow's son, my host. The godly woman
therefore lived in this prison, reft of her goods but not of her life,
of which she most desired to be reft. She pined in a narrow and
filthy cell till the accession of King James, when, as is usual at
the crowning of a new King, she received a pardon, and returned
home; where she now serves the servants of God, and has two of
ours with her in the house.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IV.</head>

<p>
While Braddocks was his head-quarters, <q>I found time,</q> he
says, <q rend='pre'>both for study and missionary excursions. I took care
that all in the house should approach the Sacraments frequently,
which none before, save the good widow, used to do oftener than
four times a year. Now they come every week. On feast-days,
and often on Sundays, I preached in the chapel; moreover, I
showed those who had leisure the way to meditate by themselves,
and taught all how to examine their conscience. I also brought in
the custom of reading pious books, which we did even at meals,
when there were no strangers there; for at that time we Priests
sat with the rest, even with our gowns on. I had a soutane
besides and a biretta, but the Superior would not have us use
these except in the chapel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In my excursions I almost always gained some to God.
There is, however, a great difference to be observed between these
counties where I then was, and other parts of England; for in
some places, where many of the common people are Catholics,
and almost all lean towards the Catholic faith, it is easy to bring
many into the bosom of the Church, and to have many hearers
<pb n='xxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiii'/>
together at a sermon. I myself have seen in Lancashire two
hundred together at Mass and sermon; and as these easily come
in, so also they easily scatter when the storm of persecution
draws near, and come back again when the alarm has blown over.
On the contrary, in those parts where I was now staying there
were very few Catholics, but these were of the higher classes;
scarcely any of the common people, for they cannot live in peace,
surrounded as they are by most violent heretics. The way of
managing in such cases, is first to gain the gentry, then the servants:
for Catholic masters cannot do without Catholic servants.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>About this time I gained to God and the Church my
hostess' brother, the only son of a certain Knight,</q> Henry, son
of Sir Edmund Huddleston, of Sawston.<note place='foot'><q>While the house at Sawston was erecting, Sir Edmund resided on his
estates in Essex, and served the office of Sheriff for that county in 20, 21,
[1578-9] and 30 Elizabeth</q> [1588] (Burke's <hi rend='italic'>Landed Gentry</hi>, 1850, vol. i.,
p. 602).</note> <q>I ever after found
him a most faithful friend in all circumstances. He afterwards
took to wife a relative<note place='foot'>The relationship is by affinity and half-blood. Jane, daughter of Sir
William Dormer, by his first wife, Mary Sidney, married Don Gomez Suarez,
Count of Feria; and Dorothy's father, Robert Lord Dormer, was a son of Sir
William, by his second wife, Dorothy Catesby (Burke's <hi rend='italic'>Peerage</hi>).</note> in the third degree of the most illustrious
Spanish Duke of Feria,</q> Dorothy, daughter of Robert first Lord
Dormer, by his wife, Elizabeth Browne, daughter of Anthony
first Viscount Montague. <q>This pious pair are so attached to
our Priests, that now in these terrible times they always keep
one in their house, and often two or three.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Besides others of less standing whom my host's mother, in
her great zeal for souls, brought me to be reconciled, she had
nearly won over a certain great lady, a neighbour of hers.
Though this lady was the wife of the richest<note place='foot'>Lady Penelope Devereux, daughter of Walter first Earl of Essex, wife of
Robert third Lord Rich, afterwards Earl of Warwick.</note> lord in the whole
county, and sister to the Earl of Essex (then most powerful with
the Queen), and was wholly given to vanities, nevertheless she
brought her so far as to be quite willing to speak with a Priest, if
only he could come to her without being known. This the good
widow told me. I consequently went to her house openly, and
addressed her as though I had something to tell her from a
<pb n='xxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiv'/>
certain great lady her kinswoman, for so it had been agreed. I
dined openly with her and all the gentry in the house, and spent
three hours at least in private talk with her. I first satisfied her
in all the doubts which she laid before me about faith; next, I
set myself to stir up her will, and before my departure I so
wrought upon her, that she asked for instructions how to prepare
herself for confession, and fixed a day for making it. Nay, she
afterwards wrote to me earnestly protesting that she desired
nothing in the world so much as to open to me the inmost
recesses of her heart. But the judgments of God are a deep
abyss, and it is a dreadful thing to expose oneself to the
occasions of sin. Now there was a nobleman<note place='foot'>Charles Blount, eighth Baron Mountjoy, who in 1603 was created Earl of
Devonshire. He was married December 26, 1605, to Lady Rich, after her
divorce, and in the lifetime of her husband, by William Laud, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury. The Earl of Devonshire died in a few months
after this marriage, April 3, 1606.</note> in London, who
had loved her long and deeply; to him she disclosed her purpose
by letter, perchance to bid him farewell; but she roused a
sleeping adder. For he hastened to her, and began to dissuade
her in every kind of way; and being himself a heretic, and not
wanting in learning, he cunningly coaxed her to get him an
answer to certain doubts of his from the same guide that she
herself followed; saying that if he was satisfied in this, he too
would become a Catholic. He implored her to take no step in
the meantime, if she did not wish for his death. So he filled two
sheets of paper about the Pope, the worship of Saints, and the
like. She sent them with a letter of her own, begging me to be so
good as to answer them, for it would be a great gain if such a
soul could be won over. He did not, however, write from a wish
to learn, but rather with the treacherous design of delaying her
conversion. For he got an answer, a full one I think, to which
he made no reply. But meanwhile he endeavoured to get her to
London, and succeeded in making her first postpone, and afterwards
altogether neglect her resolution. By all this, however, he
was unwittingly bringing on his own ruin; for later on, returning
from Ireland laden with glory, on account of his successful
administration, and his victory over the Spanish forces that had
landed there (on which occasion he brought over with him the
<pb n='xxxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxv'/>
Earl of Tyrone, who had been the most powerful opponent of
heresy in that country, and most sturdy champion of the ancient
faith), he was created an Earl, and though conqueror of others, he
conquered not himself, but was kept a helpless captive by his
love of this lady. This madness of his caused him to commit
such extravagances that he became quite notorious, and was
publicly disgraced. Unable to endure this dishonour, and yet
unwilling to renounce the cause of it, he died of grief, invoking,
alas! not God, but this goddess, <q>his angel,</q> as he called her, and
leaving her heiress of all his property. Such was his miserable
end, in bad repute of all men. The lady, though now very rich,
often afterwards began to think of her former resolution, and
often spoke of me to a certain Catholic maid of honour that she
had about her. This latter coming into Belgium about three
years back to become a Nun, related this to me, and begged me
to write to her and fan the yet unquenched spark into a flame.
But when I was setting about the letter, I heard that she had
been carried off by a fever, not, however, before she had been
reconciled to the Church by one of ours. I have set this forth at
some length, that the providence of God with regard to her
whose conversion was hindered, and His judgment upon him
who was the cause of the hindrance, may more clearly appear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I used also to make other missionary excursions at this time
to more distant counties towards the north. On the way I had to
pass through my native place, and through the midst of my
kindred and acquaintance; but I could not do much good there,
though there were many who professed themselves great friends
of mine. I experienced in fact most fully the truth of that saying
of Truth Himself, that no prophet is received in his own country;
so that I felt little wish at any time to linger among them. It
happened once that I went to lodge on one of those journeys
with a Catholic kinsman.<note place='foot'>William Wiseman, Richard Fulwood, and Ralph Willis were with
Father Gerard at Lady Gerard's house before Michaelmas, 1592 (P. R. O.,
<hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248, n. 103).</note> I found him in hunter's trim, ready to
start for a grand hunt, for which many of his friends had met
together. He asked me to go with him, and try to gain over a
certain gentleman who had married a cousin of his and mine. I
<pb n='xxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvi'/>
answered that some other occasion would be more fit. He
disagreed with me, however, maintaining that unless I took this
chance of going with him, I should not be able to get near the
person in question. I went accordingly, and during the hunt
joined company with him for whose soul I myself was on the
hunt. The hounds being at fault from time to time, and ceasing
to give tongue, while we were awaiting the renewal of this hunters'
music, I took the opportunity of following my own chase, and
gave tongue myself in good earnest. Thus, beginning to speak of
the great pains that we took over chasing a poor animal, I
brought the conversation to the necessity of seeking an everlasting
kingdom, and the proper method of gaining it, to wit, by
employing all manner of care and industry; as the devil on his
part never sleeps, but hunts after our souls as hounds hunt after
their prey. We said but little on disputed points of faith, for he
was rather a schismatic than a heretic, but to move his will to act
required a longer talk. This work was continued that day and
the day after; and on the fourth day he was spiritually born and
made a Catholic. He still remains one, and often supports
Priests at home and sends them to other people.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>V.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My journeys northwards were undertaken for the purpose of
visiting, and strengthening in the faith, certain persons who there
afforded no small aid to the common cause. Among them were
two sisters of high nobility, daughters of an Earl of very old
family who had laid down his life for the Catholic faith.<note place='foot'>Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland, was beheaded at York,
in 1572. He had four daughters: Elizabeth, wife of Richard Woodroff;
Lucy, wife of Sir Edward Stanley; Jane, wife of Lord Henry Seymour; and
Mary, the second Abbess of the English Benedictine Convent at Brussels.</note> They
lived together, and manifested a great desire to have me not
merely visit them sometimes, but rather stay altogether with them.
The elder, who had a family, became a pillar of support to that
portion of our afflicted Church. She kept two Priests with her
at home, and received all who came to her with great charity.
There are numbers of Priests in that part of the country, and
many Catholics, mostly of the poorer sort. Indeed, I was hardly
<pb n='xxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvii'/>
ever there without our counting before my departure six or
seven Priests together in her house. Thus she gave great help
to religion in the whole district during her abode there, which
lasted till I was seized and thrown into prison; whereupon she
was constrained by her husband to change her abode and go
to London, a proceeding which did neither of them any good,
and deprived the poor Catholics of many advantages. Her
sister was chosen by God for Himself. I found her unmarried,
humble and modest. Gradually she was fitted for something
higher. She learnt the practice of meditation; and profited so
well thereby, that the world soon grew vile in her eyes, and
Heaven seemed the only thing worthy of her love. I afterwards
sent her to Father Holt, in Belgium. He wrote to me on one
occasion about her in these terms: <q>Never has there come into
these parts a countrywoman of ours that has given such good
example, or done such honour to our nation.</q> She had the
chief hand in the foundation of the present convent of English
Benedictine Nuns at Brussels,<note place='foot'>This venerable Community was transferred in 1794 to Winchester, and
in 1857 to East Bergholt, in Suffolk. This was the first English Convent
founded after the Reformation, and the first to come to England at the French
Revolution.</note> where she still lives, and has
arrived to a great pitch of virtue and self-denial. She yearns
for a more retired life, and has often proposed to her director
to allow her to live as a recluse, but gives in to his reasons to
the contrary.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At first I used to carry with me on these journeys my
altar furniture, which was meagre but decent, and so contrived
that it could be easily carried, along with several other necessary
articles, by him who acted as my servant. In this way I used
to say Mass in the morning in every place where I lodged, not
however before I had looked into every corner around, that
there might be no one peering in through the chinks. I brought
my own things mainly on account of certain Catholics, my
entertainers, not having yet what was necessary for the Holy
Sacrifice. But after some years this cause was removed; for
in nearly every place that I came to they had got ready the
sacred vestments beforehand. Moreover, I had so many friends
<pb n='xxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxviii'/>
to visit on the way, and these at such distances from one another,
that it was hardly ever necessary for me to lodge at an inn on
a journey of one hundred and fifty miles; and at last I hardly
slept at an inn once in two years.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I used to visit my Superior,</q> Father Garnett, <q rend='pre'>several times
a year, when I wished to consult him on matters of importance.
Not only I, but all of us used to resort to him twice a year to give
our half-yearly account of conscience and renew the offering of
our vows to our Lord Jesus. I always remarked that the others
drew great profit from this holy custom of our Society. As for
myself, to speak my mind frankly, I never found anything do me
more good, or stir up my courage more to fulfil all the duties
which belong to our Institute, and are required of the workmen
who till the Lord's vineyard in that country. Besides experiencing
great spiritual joy from the renewal itself, I found my interior
strength recruited, and a new zeal kindled within me afterwards
in consequence; so that if I have not done any good, it must
have come from my carelessness and thanklessness, and not
from any fault of the Society, which afforded me such means
and helps to perfection.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>On one occasion we were all met together in the Superior's
house while he yet resided in the country,</q> in Worcestershire, <q rend='pre'>and
were employed in the renovation of spirit. We had had several
conferences, and the Superior had given each of us some advice
in private, when the question was started what we should do if the
Priest-hunters suddenly came upon us, seeing that there were so
many of us, and there were nothing like enough hiding-places for
all. We numbered then, I think, nine or ten of ours, besides other
Priests our friends, and some Catholics who would also have had
to seek concealment. The blessed<note place='foot'>When this was written, the strict laws of Urban VIII. had not yet been
made, which forbid the introduction of any public religious veneration except
by the authority of the Holy See.</note> Father Garnett answered,
<q>True, we ought not all to meet together now that our number is
daily increasing; however, as we are here assembled for the
greater glory of God, I will be answerable for all till the renovation
is over, but beyond that I will not promise.</q> Accordingly, on
the very day of the renovation, though he had been quite unconcerned
<pb n='xxxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxxix'/>
before, he earnestly warned every one to look to himself,
and not to tarry without necessity, adding, <q>I do not guarantee
your safety any longer.</q> Some, hearing this, mounted their
horses after dinner and rode off. Five of ours and two Secular
Priests stayed behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Next morning, about five o'clock, when Father Southwell
was beginning Mass, and the others and myself were at meditation,
I heard a bustle at the house door. Directly after I
heard cries and oaths poured forth against the servant for refusing
admittance. The fact was, that four Priest-hunters, or pursuivants
as they are called, with drawn swords were trying to break down
the door and force an entrance. The faithful servant withstood
them, otherwise we should have been all made prisoners. But
by this time Father Southwell had heard the uproar, and,
guessing what it meant, had at once taken off his vestments
and stripped the altar; while we strove to seek out everything
belonging to us, so that there might be nothing found to betray
the presence of a Priest. We did not even wish to leave boots
and swords lying about, which would serve to show there had
been many guests though none of them appeared. Hence many
of us were anxious about our beds, which were still warm, and
only covered, according to custom, previous to being made.
Some, therefore, went and turned their beds, so that the
colder part might deceive anybody who put his hand in to feel.
Thus, while the enemy was shouting and bawling outside, and
our servants were keeping the door, saying that the mistress of
the house, a widow, had not yet got up, but that she was coming
directly and would give them an answer, we profited by the
delay to stow away ourselves and all our baggage in a cleverly-contrived
hiding-place.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At last these four leopards were let in. They raged about
the house, looking everywhere, and prying into the darkest
corners with candles. They took four hours over the business;
but failed in their search,<note place='foot'>Defecerunt scrutantes scrutinio (MS.).</note> and only brought out the forbearance
of the Catholics in suffering, and their own spite and obstinacy in
seeking. At last they took themselves off, after getting paid,
forsooth, for their trouble. So pitiful is the lot of the Catholics,
<pb n='xl'/><anchor id='Pgxl'/>
that those who come with a warrant to annoy them in this or
in other way, have to be paid for so doing by the suffering
party instead of by the authorities who send them, as though
it were not enough to endure wrong, but they must also pay
for their endurance of it. When they were gone, and were
now some way off, so that there was no fear of their returning,
as they sometimes do, a lady came and summoned out of the
den, not one, but many Daniels. The hiding-place was underground,
covered with water at the bottom, so that I was standing
with my feet in water all the time. We had there Father Garnett,
Father Southwell, and Father Ouldcorne (three future martyrs),
Father Stanny, and myself, two Secular Priests, and two or
three lay gentlemen. Having thus escaped that day's danger,
Father Southwell and I set off the next day together, as we
had come. Father Ouldcorne stayed, his dwelling or residence
being</q> at Henlip House, <q>not far off.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>VI.</head>

<p>
But Father Gerard's good works were now to be interfered
with by the treachery of a servant. This man's name was
John Frank, and his deposition taken before Justice Young,
May 12, 1594,<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248, n. 103.</note> will illustrate Father Gerard's story. The Father
introduces the traitor without naming him.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There is a time for gathering stones together, and a time for
scattering them. The time had now come for trying the servants
of God, my hosts, and myself along with them. And that they
might be more like in their sufferings to their Lord for Whom
they suffered, God allowed them to be betrayed by their own
servant, whom they loved. He was not a Catholic, nor a servant
of the house, but had been once in the service of the second
brother, who when he crossed the sea recommended him to his
mother and brother. He lived in London, but often used to visit
them, and knew nearly everything that happened in either of their
houses. I had no reason for suspecting one whom all trusted.
Still I never let him see me acting as a Priest, or dressed in such
a way as to give him grounds to say that I was one. However, as
<pb n='xli'/><anchor id='Pgxli'/>
he acknowledged afterwards, he guessed what I was from seeing
his master treat me with such respect; for he nearly always set
me two or three miles on my journeys. Often too my host would
bear me company to London, where we used at that time to lodge
in this servant's house. I had not yet found by experience, that
the safest plan was to have a lodging of my own. Such were the
facts which, as the traitor afterwards stated, gave rise to his
suspicions. Feeling sure that he could get more than three
hundred pieces of silver for the sale of his master, he went to the
magistrates and bargained to betray him. They, it seems, sent
him for a while to spy out who were Priests, and how many
there were of them haunting the houses of the widow and her son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The widow's house was first searched. The Priest that
usually dwelt there was then at home, but escaped for that time
by taking refuge in a hiding-place. As for the pious widow,
they forced her to go to London, there to appear before the
Judges who tried cases concerning Catholics. At her appearance
she answered with the greatest courage, more like a free woman
than a grievously persecuted prisoner. She was thrown into gaol.</q>
From Frank we learn that the search was made Dec. 26, 1593.
</p>

<p>
<q>He saith that one Brewster, a Priest, being a tall man with a
white flaxen beard, was at old Mrs. Wiseman's house at Northend
from Michaelmas till Christmas last, and was in the house when
the pursuivants were there on Wednesday the 26th of December
last, hid in a privy place in a chamber. And William Suffield,
Mr. William Wiseman's man, came thither for him on Thursday
in the Christmas week, at five o'clock in the night, and carried
him to Mr. William Wiseman's house at Braddocks (as this
examinate heard). And afterwards Suffield came again and rode
with old Mrs. Wiseman to the Lord Rich's.</q> The seat of Lord
Rich was at Lee Priory, not far from Northend. The widow,
therefore, was not arrested on this occasion.
</p>

<p>
Of the search, Justice Young made the following report to
Lord Keeper Puckering.<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 247, n. 3.</note> <q>Right honourable, my humble duty
remembered, this is to advertize your honour that the bearers
hereof, Mr. Worsley and Mr. Newall,</q> pursuivants who were
Topcliffe's chief aiders in the searches made in the houses of
<pb n='xlii'/><anchor id='Pgxlii'/>
Catholics, <q>hath been in Essex at Mrs. Wiseman's house, being a
widow, and there they found a Mass a preparing, but the Priest
escaped, but they brought from thence Robert Wiseman her son,<note place='foot'><q>Robert Wiseman, her other son, is also an obstinate recusant and will
by no means take the oath. He is prisoner in the Clink.</q> (Young, Apr. 14,
1594. P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Dom. Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248, n. 68).</note>
and William Clarke, a lawyer, and Henry Cranedge, a physician,
and Robert Foxe, who doth acknowledge themselves all to be
recusants, and do deny to take an oath to answer truly to such
matters as shall touch the Queen's Majesty and the State, whereupon
I have committed them close prisoners, one from another.
Also they found in the said house one Nicholas Norffooke, Samuel
Savage, and one Daniell, servants unto the said Mrs. Wiseman,
and one Mrs. Ann Wiseman, a widow, and Mary Wiseman her
daughter, and Elizabeth Cranedge, and Alice Jenings, wife of
Richard Jenings, and Mary Wiseman, daughter to Mr. George
Wiseman, of Upminster, and is in Commission of the Peace, and
all these in the said house are recusants; wherefore it may stand
with your lordship's good liking, I think it were well that they
were all sent for hither to be examined, for that, the said Mrs. Jane
Wiseman&mdash;&mdash;</q> and then follows the remembrance of old Mrs.
Wiseman's wish that her pilgrimage to the Priests at Wisbech had
been barefooted, that we have already given.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith,</q> to return to Frank's examination, <q>that Mr.
Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Tanfield, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Staunton, the Priest Jesuit, was at
Mr. William Wiseman's house at Braddocks all the Christmas
last, and Richard Fulwood was his man attending on him, and
was two years coming and going thither, and was also with Mr.
Wiseman in Lancashire a little before Michaelmas was twelve
months, as Ralph Willis, who then attended on Master Gerard,
told this examinate, and were at the Lady Gerard's house, she
being at home.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith that he hath seen Mr. Gerard dine and sup
ordinarily with Mr. Wiseman at his own table in his house at
Braddocks about twelve months past, and that at Michaelmas was
twelve months they were both together in the examinate's house,</q>&mdash;Father
Gerard has just told us that they used to go there till he
got a lodging of his own&mdash;<q>and Mr. Ormes, the tailor of Fleet-street,
<pb n='xliii'/><anchor id='Pgxliii'/>
was there with him, and did take measure of Mr. Gerard
by the name of Mr. Tanfield, to make him garments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith that the said Gerard lay one night at the
Lady Mary's in Blackfriars (as he thinketh) a little before Easter
last,<note place='foot'>The Lady Mary Percy, of whom mention has been previously made.
She <q>was a devout Catholic, and had come to London a little before my
imprisonment, to get my help in passing over to Belgium, there to consecrate
herself to God. She was staying at the house of her sister,</q> who had lost the
faith, Jane, the wife of Lord Henry Seymour, with whose Protestant servants
Father Gerard was confronted later on. <q>I dined with them on the day the
witnesses mentioned. It was Lent; and they told how their mistress ate meat,
while the Lady Mary and I ate nothing but fish </q> (<hi rend='italic'>infr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pglxviii'>lxviii</ref>.).</note> and Ralph Willis, his servant, lay that night at this examinate's
house, and that Richard Fulwood, since his imprisonment
in Bridewell at Easter last, wrote a letter and sent it from
Bridewell to the Lady Mary's, and there this examinate received
it and went down with it to Mr. Gerard, who was at Mr. William
Wiseman's house at Braddocks all the Easter last, and hidden in
the house while the pursuivants were there, which letters aforesaid
this examinate did deliver to Ralph Willis, who carried them
immediately to Mr. Gerard. And this examinate saw the letters
in Mr. Gerard's hands, and heard him read them. Wherein
Fulwood wrote that he expected torture every day, and Mr.
Gerard wished that he might bear some of Fulwood's punishment.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith that the satin doublet and velvet hose which
were found in Middleton's house at the apprehension of Mr.
Gerard were Mr. Wiseman's, and the ruffs were Mrs. Wiseman's;
and if they had not been taken, the apparel should have been
carried by this examinate the next day to Mr. Wiseman in the
Counter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith that about three weeks before Michaelmas last
or thereabouts, this examinate was sent by old Mrs. Wiseman to
Mr. Gerard, from Northend to London, with Scudamore, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi>
John Wiseman, the Priest,<note place='foot'>He had previously said that <q>between Midsummer and Michaelmas last,
Scudamore the Priest was there by the name of John Wiseman and stayed
there one night.</q> John was apparently the name of the younger Jesuit, who
died in the Novitiate at Rome.</note> and a boy named Richard Cranishe,
of the age of 16 years, son of Robert Cranishe, and afterwards
<pb n='xliv'/><anchor id='Pgxliv'/>
Mrs. Jane Wiseman<note place='foot'>Amongst the letters seized at Braddocks in a search apparently in 1592,
was one <q>sent by Dolman the Priest to Mrs. Wiseman, dated 28 die Jun.,
advertizing her of her son Thomas and her son John their healths, and of his
going to Wisbech, and that he was sorry her daughter Jane had no warning
whereby she might have wrote an epistle in Latin to the Priests at Wisbech,
that they might have understood her zeal</q> (P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Dom. Eliz.</hi>, vol. 243,
n. 95).</note> and Mrs. Bridget Wiseman, sisters to Mr.
William Wiseman, came up also; and William Savage, tailor,
servant to old Mrs. Wiseman, and Richard Fulwood, Mr.
Gerard's man, attended on them, and John Jeppes came up
at the same time; all of which persons (saving Jeppes) lay
at this examinate's house a week. And then Scudamore,
the two gentlewomen, Cranishe, Savage, and this examinate,
embarked themselves at Gravesend in one Motte his bark,
and went over to Middleborough, and there lay at one Charles
his house about a fortnight, and then went to Antwerp, and
this examinate returned back again, but whether Mr. William
Wiseman did know of their going over or no he cannot
tell.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Item</hi>, he saith that Nicholas Owen, who was taken in bed
with Mr. Gerard the Jesuit, was at Mr. Wiseman's house at
Christmas was twelve months, and called by the name of Little
John and Little Michael, and the cloak that he wore was Mr.
Wiseman's cloak a year past, and was of sad green cloth with
sleeves, caped with tawny velvet and little gold strips turning on
the cape. And the said Owen was at Mr. Emerson's at Felsted
while Mrs. Wiseman lay there.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
Such is Frank's examination, taken in May, 1594, and it will
throw much light on the subsequent narrative. On the 14th of
April, Justice Young sent to Lord Keeper Puckering<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Dom. Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248, n. 68.</note> <q>the names
of them that were found in Mr. Wiseman's house: John
Fulwood, Richard Fulwood, Richard Wallis, William Wallis,
William Suffield, Ralph Williamson, John Stratforde. These
men are all recusants, and will not take an oath to the Queen's
Majesty, nor to answer to anything. One Thomas was apprehended
when his master was taken, and he fled away with his
master's best gelding and a handful of gold that his master gave
<pb n='xlv'/><anchor id='Pgxlv'/>
him. All these were servants<note place='foot'>Young adds, <q>Mr. Wiseman and his mother had many more servants,
both men and maids, all which were recusants, and none of them would come
to church, to the great offence and scandal of all Her Majesty's good subjects
in that country.</q></note> to Mr. William Wiseman, who is a
continual receiver of all Seminary Priests, and went to Wisbech
to visit the Priests and Jesuits there, and since his imprisonment
there was a Seminary Priest in his house which escaped away
from the Justices and pursuivants and left his apparel behind
him.</q> This was, as we shall see, Father Gerard himself, and
later on he was made to try on the clothes thus found, and
<q>they were just a fit.</q> All this was to prove Mr. Wiseman guilty
of harbouring a Priest, <q>which,</q> Father Gerard says, <q>they were
never able to do.</q>
</p>

<p>
Father Garnett, in a letter<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS. <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, ii., p. 550.</note> to Father Persons at Rome, dated
Sept. 6, 1594, thus describes the capture of the servants. <q>The
Friday night before Passion Sunday</q> [March 15] <q>was such a
hurly-burly in London as never was seen in man's memory; no,
not when Wyatt was at the gates. A general search in all London,
the Justices and chief citizens going in person; all unknown
persons taken and put in churches till the next day. No Catholics
found, but one poor tailor's house at Golding-lane end, which was
esteemed such a booty as never was got since this Queen's days.
The tailor and divers others there taken lie yet in prison, and
some of them have been tortured. That mischance touched us
near; they were our friends and chiefest instruments. That very
night had been there <hi rend='italic'>Long John</hi> with the little beard, once your
pupil</q> [in the margin is written <hi rend='italic'>John Gerard</hi>], <q>if I had not
more importunately stayed him than ever before. But soon after
he was apprehended, being betrayed we know not how; he will be
stout I doubt not. He hath been very close, but now is removed
from the Counter to the Clink, where he may in time do much
good. He was glad of Mr. Homulus<note place='foot'>Mr. <q>Homulus</q> is Ralph Emerson, the Lay-brother, of whom Father
Campion wrote to the General, <q>Homulus meus et ego</q> (<hi rend='italic'>infr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pglxx'>lxx</ref>). It
was of the greatest consequence that no names to strike the eye should appear
in letters, in case they were intercepted.</note> his company, but he had
been taken from him and carried to Newgate, whence he hopeth
to redeem him again.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xlvi'/><anchor id='Pgxlvi'/>

<p>
Father Gerard tells the story thus. <q>The hidden traitor,
wholly unknown to his master, was watching his chance of
giving us up without betraying his own treachery. At first he
settled to have me seized in a house</q> in Golding-lane <q rend='pre'>which
had been lately hired in London to answer my own and my
friends' purposes. From his master's employing him in many
affairs, he could not help knowing the place which his master had
hired for my use. Consequently he promised the magistrates to
tell them when I was coming, so that they might surround the
house during the night with their officers, and cut off my escape.
The plan would have succeeded, had not God provided otherwise
through an act of obedience.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My Superior had lately come to live four or five miles from
London.<note place='foot'>Probably White Webbs in Enfield Chase, called <q>Dr. Hewick's house</q>
(P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 70).</note> I had gone to see him, and had been with him a day
or two, when, having business in London, I wrote to those who
kept the house to expect me on such a night, and bring in
certain friends whom I wanted to see. The traitor, who was
now often seen in the house, which belonged ostensibly to his
master, learnt the time, and got the Priest-hunters to come there
at midnight with their band.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Just before mounting my horse to depart, I went to take
leave of my Superior. He would have me stay that night. I told
him my business, and my wish to keep my appointment with my
friends; but the blessed Father would not allow it, though, as he
said afterwards, he knew no reason, nor was it his wont to act in
this manner. Without doubt he was guided by the inspiration of
God; for early next morning we heard that some Papists had been
seized in that house, and the story ran that a Priest was among
them. The fact was that my servant, Richard Fulwood, was
caught trying to hide himself in a dark place, there being as
yet no regular hiding-places, though I meant to make some. As
he cut a good figure, and neither the traitor nor any one else that
knew him was there, he was taken for a Priest. Three Catholics
and one schismatic were seized and thrown into prison. The
latter was a Catholic at heart, but did not refuse to go to the
heretics' churches. As he was a trusty man, I employed him as
<pb n='xlvii'/><anchor id='Pgxlvii'/>
keeper of the house, to manage any business in the neighbourhood.
At their examination they all showed themselves steadfast
and true, and answered nothing that could give the enemy any
inkling that the house belonged to me instead of to my host. It
was well that it was so; for things would have gone harder with
the latter had it been otherwise. The magistrates sent him a
special summons, in the hope that my arrest would enable them
to make out a stronger case against him. As soon as he arrived
in London he went straight to the house, never dreaming what
had happened there, in order to treat with me as to the reason of
his summons, and how he was to answer it. So he came and
knocked at the door. It was opened to him at once; but, poor
sheep of Christ, he fell into the clutches of wolves, instead of the
arms of his shepherd and friend. For the house had been broken
into the night before, and there were some ministers of Satan still
lingering there, to watch for any Catholics that might come,
before all got scent of the danger. Out came these men then;
the good gentleman found himself ensnared, and was led prisoner
to the magistrates. <q>How many Priests do you keep in your
house?</q> <q>Who are they?</q> were the questions poured in upon
him on all sides. He made answer, that harbouring Priests was a
thing punishable with death, and so he had taken good care not
to run such a risk. On their still pressing him, he said that he
was ready to meet any accusation that could be brought against
him on this head. However, they would not hint anything about
me, because though disappointed this time, they still hoped to
catch me later, as the traitor was as yet unsuspected.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My host had on hand a translation of a work of Father
Jerome Platus, <hi rend='italic'>On the Happiness of a Religious State</hi>. He had
just finished the second part, and had brought it with him to see
me about it. When he was seized, these papers were seized too.
Being asked what they were, he said it was a book of devotion.
Now the heretics are wont to pry into any writings that they find,
because they are afraid of anything being published against themselves
and their false doctrine. Not having time to go on with
the whole case, they were very earnest about his being answerable
for those papers. He said that there was nothing contained in
them against the State or against sound teaching; and offered on
<pb n='xlviii'/><anchor id='Pgxlviii'/>
the spot to prove the goodness and holiness of everything that
was there set down. In so doing, as he told me afterwards, he
felt great comfort at having to answer for so good a book. He
was thrown into prison, and kept in such close confinement that
only one of his servants was allowed to go near him, and that
was the traitor. Knowing that his master had no inkling of
his bad faith, they hoped by his means to find out my retreat,
and seize my person much sooner than they could otherwise have
done.</q>
</p>

<p>
The following is Mr. Wiseman's examination, taken before
Sir Edward Coke and others, in which will be found the defence
of Father Jerome Platus, which Father Gerard so accurately
remembered, and embodied in his Narrative.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The examination<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Dom. Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248, n. 36.</note> of William Wiseman, of Wymbyshe, in
the county of Essex, gentleman, taken the 19th day of March, in
the thirty-sixth year of Her Majesty's reign [1594].</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He saith that he hath the murrey</q> [mulberry-coloured]
<q rend='pre'>beads (showed unto him upon his examination) of a gentlewoman
and friend of his, and that he will not tell her name, for that she
is a Catholic, as he termeth her, and saith that he hath had these
beads about a year and a quarter, and received the same at
Wymbyshe aforesaid, at his house there, called Broadoaks, and
saith now, upon better advertisement, that his sister, Bridget
Wiseman, now being beyond sea, did get the said beads and
string the same for him, this examinate, but where she had them
he cannot tell. Being demanded whether he knew a book
(showed to him upon his examination) called <hi rend='italic'>Breviarium
Romanum</hi>, he denieth that he knoweth the book or whose it
is. He supposeth that a letter showed unto him upon his
examination, beginning, <q>Dear son, this day,</q> &amp;c. &amp;c., and
ending with <q>Commendation to all my friends,</q> is his mother's
own handwriting, and sent unto him, this examinate, to his house
aforesaid to-morrow shall be a seven-night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And saith that a friend of his hath hired the house in
Golding-lane, where he was apprehended, but denieth to tell
his name for charity sake, but saith that his friend hired it of
<pb n='xlix'/><anchor id='Pgxlix'/>
Mr. Tute, dwelling in the next house unto it, and saith that he
hired it the last term. And saith that his friend did hire the said
house for him, this examinate, and his mother, and saith that he
never was at the house before, but came to the said house by
such description as his friend made to him of it, and that this
examinate came thither on Saturday at night to lie there, and his
man (whose name <emph>he will not tell</emph>,<note place='foot'>In the original the words <q>is Richard Fulwood</q> are interlined, and
<q>he will not tell</q> underlined or erased.</note> is Richard Fulwood) provided
him by his commandment and appointment a bed and furniture
belonging to the same in the said house, and knoweth not
whether the bedding was in the house before he, this examinate,
hired the same house or no, but thinketh that some of the
bedding that now is there was in the house before.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He saith that the said Richard Fulwood hath served him
about Shrovetide last was two years.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And saith that since he, this examinate, was confined, he
hath used John Fulwood, brother to the said Richard Fulwood,
in travelling about his business.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And saith that his servant, Thomas Barker, after he was
apprehended and under arrest, was sent by this examinate to his
inn, to return to him again as he saith, and further saith that
before the said Thomas Barker went off out of the constable's
custody, he, this examinate, laid two angels in the headborough's
hand, and to take them to his own use if his servant did not
return again. He thinketh he is gone to this examinate's house
and denieth that he gave any message to the said Thomas Barker,
save only that he should signify to his housekeeper where he this
examinate was, and saith that Thomas Barker hath dwelt with
him above a year past, and was commended to him by a friend of
his being a Catholic, and refuseth to tell his name; and saith that
both his said servants have been recusants ever since they dwelt
with him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And confesseth that a book intituled <hi rend='italic'>Hieronymi Plati de
Societate Jesu de bono statu religionis</hi> is his own, and that he
caused the same to be bought at Cawood's shop in Paul's
Churchyard, and saith that the book containeth nothing but true
doctrine, and that he translated it through with his own hand&mdash;which
<pb n='l'/><anchor id='Pgl'/>
was found and yet remaineth&mdash;the book; and that his
servant Richard Fulwood bought the same, and hath had it or
the like by the space of these two years and more, and saith that
certain of his friends<note place='foot'>Being learned. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> coming to him this examinate, he the said
examinate commended the same book to them to be a good book,
and delivered the same book to them, to be seen and read of,
and saith within the said two years he this examinate bought
divers of the said book and hath sent of the same to some of the
examinate's friends, as namely to the Priests at Wisbech, that is
to say, Father Edmonds, and to no other by name but to him, but
generally to the Priests, which is about a year past: and that the
said Father Edmonds returned thanks [in] answer to the examinate
that he liked the book very well, and this book he sent and
received answer by his said servant Thomas Barker, who was
born in Norwich, and saith that this examinate hath read over
the first and half the second of the said book unto the 12th
chapter, and that he dare to take upon him to defend so much to
be sound and true: and saith that this examinate was with Father
Edmonds at Wisbech about Michaelmas last was twelve months,
and there saw and spake with him both privately and in company.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>W. Wiseman.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Examined by</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Edw. Coke</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Will. Danyell.</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Edw. Vaughan.</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>R. Watson.</hi></q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ryc. Young.</hi></q></l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<head>VII.</head>

<p>
<q>On learning the seizure of our house at London,</q> Father Gerard
continues, <q rend='pre'>and my host's imprisonment, I went down to his
country house to settle with his wife and friends what was to be
done, and put all our effects in safe keeping. As we wanted the
altar furniture for the approaching Easter, we sent very little of it
to our friends. Of course I could not stay away from my entertainers
at so holy a time, especially as they were in sorrow and
trouble. In Holy Week the treacherous servant came from
<pb n='li'/><anchor id='Pgli'/>
London with a letter from his master, wherein the latter set forth
all that had befallen him, the questions that had been put to him,
and his answers. This letter, though seen, had been let pass for
the credit of the bearer, to give him a chance of seeing whether I
was in the house at this solemn season. He brought me another
letter from my servant, whose capture I spoke of above. When
from the traitor's information they knew him to be my servant,
hoping to wrest from him the disclosure of his friends and
abettors, they kept him in solitary confinement in the loathsome
prison of Bridewell. The purport of the letter was how he had
denied everything,<note place='foot'>It was of the last importance for the friends of a prisoner to know, if
possible, what replies he had really given, not only that they might take
measures, if necessary, for their own safety, but also that they might know
how far to go in their own answers when summoned. The persecutors were
constantly in the habit of publishing all sorts of pretended replies which they
said had been given by prisoners in their secret examinations, so that prisoners
seized every possible opportunity of communicating the truth to their friends,
often, as we shall see, in the most ingenious way.</note> what threats had been held out to him, and
what his sufferings were in prison. He had, he said, hardly
enough black bread to keep him from starving; his abode was a
narrow strongly-built cell, in which there was no bed, so that he
had to sleep sitting on the window-sill, and was months without
taking off his clothes. There was a little straw in the place, but
it was so trodden down and swarming with vermin that he could
not lie on it. But what was most intolerable to him was their
leaving all that came from him in an open vessel in that narrow
den, so that he was continually distressed and almost stifled by
the smell. Besides all this, he was daily awaiting an examination
by torture.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While reading the letter to my hostess in presence of the
traitor, I chanced to say at this last part, <q>I wish I could bear
some of his tortures, so that there might be less for him.</q> It was
these words of mine that let us know later on who was the traitor,
and author of all our woes. For when I was taken and questioned,
and declared I was quite unacquainted with the family, those who
were examining me forgot their secret, and cried out, <q>What lies
you tell!&mdash;did you not say so-and-so before such a lady, as you
read your servant's letter?</q> But I still denied it, giving them
<pb n='lii'/><anchor id='Pglii'/>
good reasons, however, why, even if it had been true, I could
and ought to have denied it.<note place='foot'>It will be noticed, both from this passage and many others, that the
persecuted Catholics followed that common doctrine of theologians, maintained
also by many Protestant moralists, that an unjust oppressor has no right, by
the law of God, to exact or expect true answers from his victims, if such true
answers would help his unjust designs, except where the question is of the
faith of the prisoner. It is quite likely that many will be startled now-a-days
at such direct denials, owing to our present freedom from those extreme
circumstances in which such denials were then made. Their own lives were at
stake, or those of other innocent persons, whom it would have been a sin to
betray; and for those persons' sake, if they held such denials to be lawful, they
were bound to make them. The English law, with a tenderness then unknown,
would now protect a man from all efforts to make him criminate himself.
The persecutors themselves, who showed so great indignation at their victims'
falsehoods, told lies systematically <emph>in order to ensnare the Catholics</emph>; a thing
which no code of morality ever countenanced, whether Catholic or Protestant.
We propose to discuss this subject more fully in the sequel.</note> But to take up the thread of my
story.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The traitor on his return to London informed our enemies of
everything. Forthwith they sent two of their best messengers, or
pursuivants as they call them, to two gentlemen of the county,
who were Justices of the Peace, bidding them search the house
carefully with their men. The traitor also returned on Easter
Sunday, on pretence of bringing a fresh letter from London, but
in reality to play into the hands of our enemies and acquaint them
with our plans. On Easter Monday</q> [April 1, 1594], <q rend='pre'>on account
of the dangers that threatened us, we rose before our usual hour,
and were trying to get ready for Mass before sunrise, when suddenly
we heard the noise of horses galloping, and of a multitude of men
coming to surround the house and cut off all escape. Seeing
what was going to happen, we had the doors kept fast. Meanwhile
the ornaments were pulled off the altar, the hiding-places
thrown open, my books and papers carried into them, and an
effort was made to hide me and all my effects together. I wanted to
get into a hiding-place near the dining-room, as well to be further
from the chapel and the more suspicious part of the house, as
because there was store of provisions there, to wit, a bottle of
wine, and certain light but strengthening food, such as biscuit
made to keep, &amp;c. Moreover, I hoped to hear our enemies talk,
wherein there might be something, perchance, which bore upon
<pb n='liii'/><anchor id='Pgliii'/>
our interests. These reasons, then, moved me to choose that
place, and, in sooth, it was very fit and safe for hiding in. But
God so willed it, that the mistress of the house should in nowise
agree. She would have me go into a place near the chapel, where
the altar furniture could sooner be stowed with me. I yielded,
though there was nothing there for me to eat in case the search
should last long. I went in, then, after everything was safe that
needed putting away.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Scarcely had I done so, when the searchers broke down the
door, and forcing their way in, spread through the house with
great noise and racket. Their first step was to lock up the
mistress of the house in her own room with her maids; and
the Catholic servants they kept locked up in divers places in
the same part of the house. They then took to themselves the
whole house, which was of a good size, and made a thorough
search in every part, not forgetting even to look under the tiles
of the roof. The darkest corners they examined with the help of
candles. Finding nothing whatever, they began to break down
certain places that they suspected. They measured the walls with
long rods, so that if they did not tally, they might pierce the part
not accounted for. Thus they sounded the walls and all the
boards, to find out and break into any hollow places that there
might be.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They spent two days in this work without finding anything.
Thinking, therefore, that I had gone on Easter Sunday, the two
magistrates went away on the second day, leaving the pursuivants
to take the mistress of the house, and all her Catholic servants of
both sexes, to London, to be examined and imprisoned. They
meant to leave some who were not Catholics to keep the house,
the traitor being one of them. The good lady was pleased at this,
for she hoped that he would be the means of freeing me, and
rescuing me from death: for she knew that I had made up my
mind to suffer and die of starvation between two walls, rather than
come forth and save my own life at the expense of others. In
fact, during those four days that I lay hid, I had nothing to eat
but a biscuit or two and a little quince jelly, which my hostess
had at hand and gave me as I was going in. She did not look
for any more, as she supposed that the search would not last
<pb n='liv'/><anchor id='Pgliv'/>
beyond a day. But now that two days were gone, and she was
to be carried off on the third with all her trusty servants, she
began to be afraid of my dying of sheer hunger. She bethought
herself then of the traitor, who she heard was to be left behind.
He had made a great fuss and show of eagerness in withstanding
the searchers, when they first forced their way in. For all that,
she would not have let him know of the hiding-places, had she
not been in such straits. Thinking it better, however, to rescue
me from certain death, though it was at her own risk, she charged
him, when she was taken away, and every one had gone, to go
into a certain room, call me by my wonted name, and tell me that
the others had been taken to prison, but that he was left to deliver
me. I would then answer, she said, from behind the wainscot
where I lay concealed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The traitor promised to obey faithfully, but was faithful only
to the faithless, for he unfolded the whole matter to the ruffians
who had been left behind. No sooner had they heard it, than
they called back the magistrates who had departed. These
returned early in the morning, and renewed the search. They
measured and sounded everywhere, much more carefully than
before, especially in the chamber above mentioned, in order to
find out some hollow place. But finding nothing whatever during
the whole of the third day, they purposed on the morrow to strip
off all the wainscot of that room. Meanwhile they set guards in all
the rooms about, to watch all night lest I should escape. I heard
from my hiding-place the pass-word which the captain of the band
gave to his soldiers, and I might have got off by using it, were it
not that they would have seen me issuing from my retreat: for
there were two on guard in the chapel where I got into my
hiding-place, and several also in the large wainscotted room which
had been pointed out to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But mark the wonderful providence of God. Here was I in
my hiding-place. The way I got into it was by taking up the
floor, made of wood and bricks, under the fire-place. The place
was so constructed that a fire could not be lit in it without
damaging the house; though we made a point of keeping wood
there, as if it were meant for a fire. Well, the men on the night-watch
lit a fire in this very grate, and began chatting together
<pb n='lv'/><anchor id='Pglv'/>
close to it. Soon the bricks, which had not bricks but wood
underneath them, got loose, and nearly fell out of their places, as
the wood gave way. On noticing this and probing the bottom
with a stick, they found that the bottom was made of wood;
whereupon they remarked that this was something curious. I
thought that they were going there and then to break open the
place and enter; but they made up their minds at last to put off
further examination till next day. Meanwhile, though nothing was
further from my thoughts than any chance of escaping, I besought
the Lord earnestly, that if it were for the glory of His Name, I
might not be taken in that house, and so endanger my entertainers;
nor in any other house, where others would share my
disaster. My prayer was heard. I was preserved in that house
in a wonderful manner; and when, a few days after, I was taken,
it was without prejudice to any one, as shall be presently seen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Next morning, therefore, they renewed the search most carefully,
everywhere except in the top chamber which served as a
chapel, and in which the two watchmen had made a fire over my
head, and had noticed the strange make of the grate. God had
blotted out of their memory all remembrance of the thing. Nay,
none of the searchers entered the place the whole day, though it
was the one that was most open to suspicion, and if they had
entered, they would have found me without any search; rather, I
should say, they would have seen me, for the fire had burnt a
great hole in my hiding-place, and had I not got a little out of the
way, the hot embers would have fallen on me. The searchers,
forgetting or not caring about this room, busied themselves in
ransacking the rooms below, in one of which I was said to be.
In fact, they found the other hiding-place to which I thought of
going, as I mentioned before. It was not far off, so I could hear
their shouts of joy when they first found it. But after joy comes
grief; and so it was with them. The only thing that they found,
was a goodly store of provision laid up. Hence they may have
thought that this was the place that the mistress of the house
meant; in fact, an answer might have been given from it to the
call of a person in the room mentioned by her.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They stuck to their purpose, however, of stripping off all the
wainscot of the other large room. So they set a man to work
<pb n='lvi'/><anchor id='Pglvi'/>
near the ceiling, close to the place where I was: for the lower
part of the walls was covered with tapestry, not with wainscot. So
they stripped off the wainscot all round, till they came again to the
very place where I lay, and there they lost heart and gave up the
search. My hiding-place was in a thick wall of the chimney,
behind a finely laid and carved mantel-piece. They could not
well take the carving down without risk of breaking it. Broken,
however, it would have been, and that into a thousand pieces,
had they any conception that I could be concealed behind it.
But knowing that there were two flues, they did not think that
there could be room enough there for a man. Nay, before this,
on the second day of the search, they had gone into the room
above, and tried the fire-place through which I had got into my
hole. They then got into the chimney by a ladder to sound with
their hammers. One said to another in my hearing, <q>Might there
not be a place here for a person to get down into the wall of the
chimney below, by lifting up this hearth?</q> <q>No,</q> answered one
of the pursuivants, whose voice I knew, <q>you could not get down
that way into the chimney underneath, but there might easily be
an entrance at the back of this chimney.</q> So saying, he gave the
place a kick. I was afraid that he would hear the hollow sound
of the hole where I was. But God, Who set bounds to the sea,
said also to their dogged obstinacy, <q>Thus far shalt thou go, and
no further;</q> and He spared His sorely-stricken children, and gave
them not up into their persecutors' hands, nor allowed utter ruin
to light upon them for their great charity towards me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Seeing that their toil availed them naught, they thought that
I had escaped somehow, and so they went away at the end of
four days, leaving the mistress and her servants free. The yet
unbetrayed traitor stayed after the searchers were gone. As soon
as the doors of the house were made fast, the mistress came to
call me, another four-days-buried Lazarus, from what would have
been my tomb had the search continued a little longer. For I
was all wasted and weakened, as well with hunger, as with want
of sleep, and with having to sit so long in such a narrow place.
The mistress of the house, too, had eaten nothing whatever during
the whole time, not only to share my distress, and to try on
herself how long I could live without food, but chiefly to draw
<pb n='lvii'/><anchor id='Pglvii'/>
down the mercy of God on me, herself, and her family, by this
fasting and prayer. Indeed, her face was so changed when I
came out, that she seemed quite another woman, and I should
not have known her but for her voice and her dress. After
coming out, I was seen by the traitor, whose treachery was still
unknown to us. He did nothing then, not even send after the
searchers, as he knew that I meant to be off before they could be
recalled.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>VIII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As soon as I had taken a little refreshment and rest, I set out
and went to a friend's house, where I kept still for a fortnight.
Then knowing that I had left my friends in great distress, I
proceeded to London to aid and comfort them. I got a safe
lodging with a person of rank.<note place='foot'>This was the unfortunate Countess of Arundel, whose husband, Philip
Howard, Earl of Arundel, was at this time (1594) in the tenth year of his
imprisonment in the Tower. He died the following year in the same prison,
the noblest victim to the jealous and suspicious tyranny of Elizabeth, <hi rend='italic'>non sine
veneni suspicione</hi>, as his epitaph still testifies.</note> A year ago it had been Father
Southwell's abode, before his seizure and imprisonment in the
Tower of London, where he now was. I wanted, however, to
hire a house where I might be safe and unknown, and be free to
treat with my friends; for I could not manage my business in a
house that was not my own, especially in such a one as I then
dwelt in. I had recourse to a servant of Father Garnett, named
Little John,<note place='foot'>This holy martyr's true name was Nicholas Owen. Father Gerard gives
an interesting account of him in the Narrative of the Powder Plot (<hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>).</note> an excellent man and one well able to help me. He
it was that used to make our hiding-places; in fact, he made the
one to which I owed my safety. Thanks to his endeavours, I
found a house well suited for my purpose, and settled with my
landlord about the rent. Till the house was furnished, I hired
a room in my landlord's own house.<note place='foot'>We learn from Frank that it was called Middleton's.</note> There I resolved to pass
two or three nights in arranging my affairs, getting letters from
my friends in distress, and writing back letters of comfort in
return. Thus it was that the traitor got sent to the place, which
<pb n='lviii'/><anchor id='Pglviii'/>
was only known to a small circle of friends. It was God's will
that my hour should then come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One night, when Little John and I had to sleep in that
room, the traitor had to bring a letter that needed an answer, and
he left with the answer about ten o'clock. I had only come in
about nine, sorely against the will of the lady, my entertainer,
who was uncommonly earnest that I should not leave her house
that night. Away went the traitor then, and gave information to
the Priest-hunters both when and where he had left me. They
got together a band, and came at midnight to the house, just as I
had gone to sleep. Little John and I were both awakened by the
noise outside. I guessed what it was, and told John to hide the
letter received that night in the ashes where the fire had been.
No sooner had he done so and got into bed again, than the noise
which we had heard before seemed to travel up to our room.
Then some men began knocking at the chamber-door, ready to
break it in if it was not opened at once. There was no exit
except by the door where our foes were; so I bade John get up
and open the door. The room was at once filled with men,
armed with swords and staves; and many more stood outside,
who were not able to enter. Among the rest stood two pursuivants,
one of whom knew me well, so there was no chance of my
passing unknown.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I got up and dressed, as I was bid. All my effects were
searched, but without a single thing being found that could do
harm to any man. My companion and I were then taken off to
prison. By God's grace we did not feel distressed, nor did we
show any token of fear. What I was most afraid of was, that they
had seen me come out of that lady's house, and had tracked me
to the room that I had hired; and so that the noble family that
had harboured me would suffer on my account. But this fear was
unfounded; for I learnt afterwards that the traitor had simply
told them where he had left me, and there it was that they
found me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The pursuivant who knew me, kept me in his house two
nights; either because those who were to examine me were
hindered from doing so on the first day, or (as it struck me
afterwards) because they wished first to examine my companion,
<pb n='lix'/><anchor id='Pglix'/>
Little John. I noticed the first night, that the room where I was
locked up was not far from the ground; and that it would be
easy to let myself down from the window by tearing up the bedclothes
and making a rope of them. I should have done so that
very night, had I not heard some one stirring in the next room.
I thought that he was put there to watch me, and so it turned
out. However, I meant to carry out my plan the night after, if
the watchman went away; but my keeper forestalled me; for to
save the expense of a guard, he put irons on my arms, which
prevented me from bringing my hands together and from separating
them. Then in truth I was more at ease in mind, though
less in body; for the thought of escape vanished, and there came
in its place a feeling of joy that I had been vouchsafed this
suffering for the sake of Christ, and I thanked the Lord for it as
well as I could.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Next day I was brought before the Commissioners, at the
head of whom was one who is now Lord Chancellor of the
realm.<note place='foot'>Sir Thomas Egerton, afterwards Lord Ellesmere and Viscount Brackley,
was Attorney General at this date, 1594, and Lord Chancellor in 1609, when
this was written. His having been a Catholic is not mentioned by his
biographers.</note> He had been a Catholic, but went over to the other side,
for he loved the things of this world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They first asked me my name and calling. I gave them the
name I passed by; whereupon one called me by my true name,
and said that I was a Jesuit. As I was aware that the pursuivant
knew me, I answered that I would be frank and open in everything
that belonged to myself, but would say nothing that could
affect others. So I told them my name and calling, to wit
that, though most unworthy, I was a Priest of the Society of
Jesus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Who sent you into England?</q> they asked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>The Superiors of the Society.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>To what end?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>To bring back stray souls to their Creator.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No, no,</q> said they; <q>you were sent for matters of State;
and to lure people from the obedience of the Queen to the
obedience of the Pope.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='lx'/><anchor id='Pglx'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>As for matters of State,</q> I replied, <q>we are forbidden to
have anything to say to them, as they do not belong to our
Institute. This prohibition, indeed, extends to all the members of
the Society; but on us Missioners it is particularly enjoined in a
special instruction. As for the obedience due to the Queen and
the Pope, each is to be obeyed in that wherein they have jurisdiction;
and one obedience does not clash with the other, as
England and all Christian realms have hitherto experienced.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>How long have you been doing duty as a Priest in this
country?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>About six years.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>How, and where, did you land, and where have you lived
since your landing?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I cannot in conscience answer any of these questions,</q> I
replied, <q>especially the last, as it would bring mischief on others;
so I crave pardon for not satisfying your wishes.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Nay,</q> said they, <q>it is just on these heads that we chiefly
desire you to satisfy us, and we bid you in the Queen's name to
do so.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I honour the Queen,</q> said I, <q>and will obey her and you
in all that is lawful, but here you must hold me excused: for
were I to mention any person or place where I have been lodged,
the innocent would have to suffer, according to your laws, for
the kind service they have done me. Such behaviour on my
part would be against all justice and charity, and therefore I
never will be guilty of it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You shall do so by force, if not by goodwill.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I hope,</q> I said, <q>by the grace of God, it shall not be as
you say. I beg you, therefore, to take this my answer: that
neither now nor at any other time will I disclose what you
demand of me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thereupon they wrote a warrant for my imprisonment, and
gave it to the pursuivants, bidding them take me to prison. As
we were leaving, he who is now Chancellor said that I must be
kept in close confinement, as in cases of high treason. <q>But
tell the gaolers,</q> he added, <q>to treat him well on account of his
birth.</q> It seems, however, that the head gaoler gave orders at
variance with this humane recommendation: for I was lodged
<pb n='lxi'/><anchor id='Pglxi'/>
in a garret,<note place='foot'>Father Gerard was first confined in the Counter, as he tells us later.
Father Garnett in one of his letters speaks of the Counter as <q>a very evil
prison and without comfort.</q> There were in London three prisons of this
name: the Counter, a part of the parish church of St. Margaret in Southwark;
the Counter in the Poultry, <q>some four houses west from the parish church
of St. Mildred</q>; and the new Counter in Wood-street, removed from Bread-street
in 1555 (Stow's <hi rend='italic'>Survey of London</hi>, ed. Thoms, pp. 99, 131).</note> where there was nothing but a bed, and no room
to stand up straight, except just where the bed was. There was
one window always open, through which foul air entered and
rain fell on to my bed. The room door was so low, that I
had to enter, not on my feet, but on my knees, and even then
I was forced to stoop. However, I reckoned this rather an
advantage, inasmuch as it helped to keep out the stench (certainly
no small one) that came from the privy close to my door, which
was used by all the prisoners in that part of the house. I was
often kept awake, or woke up, by the bad smell.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In this place I passed two or three days of true repose.
I felt no pain or anxiety of mind, and enjoyed, by the blessing
of God, that peace which the world does not and cannot give.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the third or fourth day, I was taken for a second
examination to the house of a magistrate called Young. He
it was who had the management of all the searches and persecutions
that the Catholics in the neighbourhood of London had
to endure; and it was to him that the traitor had given his
information. Along with him was another, who had for many
years conducted the examination by torture, Topcliffe by name.
He was a man of cruelty, athirst for the blood of the Catholics,
and so crafty and cunning, that all the wily wit of his companion
seemed abashed into silence by his presence; in fact, the Justice
spoke very little during the whole examination. I found the
two of them alone: Young in a civilian's dress, Topcliffe with
a sword by his side and in a Court dress. He was an old man,
grown grey in wickedness. Young began questioning me as to
my place of abode, and the Catholics that I knew. I answered
that I neither could nor would make disclosures that would get
any one into trouble, for reasons already stated. He turned then
to Topcliffe and said, <q>I told you how you would find him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Topcliffe looked frowningly at me and said, <q>Do you know
<pb n='lxii'/><anchor id='Pglxii'/>
me? I am Topcliffe, of whom I doubt not you have often
heard.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He meant this to frighten me. To heighten the effect, he
had laid his sword on the table near his hand, as though he
were ready to use it on occasion. But he failed certainly, and
caused me not the least alarm; and whereas I was wont to
answer with deference on other occasions, this time I did quite
the contrary, because I saw him making a show to scare me.
Finding that he could get no other manner of reply from me
than what I had given, he took a pen and wrote an artful and
malicious form of examination.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Here,</q> says he, <q>read this paper. I shall show it to the
Privy Council, that they may see what a traitor you are to the
realm, and how manifestly guilty.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The contents of the paper were as follows: <q>The examinate
was sent by the Pope and the Jesuit Persons, and coming
through Belgium there had interviews with the Jesuit Holt and
Sir William Stanley; thence he came into England, on a political
errand, to beguile the Queen's subjects, and lure them from their
obedience to their Sovereign. If, therefore, he will not disclose
the places and persons with whom he has lived, it is presumed
that he has done much mischief to the State,</q> &amp;c.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On reading this, I saw that I could not meet so many
falsehoods with one single denial; and as I was desirous that
he should show my way of answering to the Council, I said that
I also wished to answer in writing. Hereat Topcliffe was overjoyed,
and cried out, <q>Oh! now you are a reasonable man;</q> but
he was disappointed. He had hoped to catch me in my words,
or at least to find out my handwriting, so that some of the
papers found in the houses of the Catholics might be proved
to be mine. I foresaw this, and therefore wrote in a feigned
hand as follows: <q>I was sent by my Superiors. I never was in
Belgium. I have not seen Father Holt since the time that I
left Rome. I have not seen Sir William Stanley since he left
England with the Earl of Leicester. I am forbidden to meddle
with matters of State; I never have done, and never will do so.
I have tried to bring back souls to the knowledge and love of
their Creator, and to make them show obedience to the laws
<pb n='lxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxiii'/>
of God and man; and I hold this last point to be a matter
of conscience. I humbly crave that my refusal to answer
anything concerning the persons that I know, may not be set
down to contempt of authority; seeing that God's commandment
forces me to follow this course, and to act otherwise would be
against justice and charity.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While I was writing this, the old man waxed wroth. He
shook with passion, and would fain have snatched the paper
from me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>If you don't want me to write the truth,</q> said I, <q>I'll not
write at all.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Nay,</q> quoth he, <q>write so-and-so, and I'll copy out what
you have written.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I shall write what <emph>I</emph> please,</q> I answered, <q>and not what <emph>you</emph>
please. Show what I have written to the Council, for I shall
add nothing but my name.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This I signed so near the writing, that nothing could be put
in between. The hot-tempered man, seeing himself disappointed,
broke out into threats and blasphemies. <q>I'll get you put into
my power, and hang you in the air, and show you no mercy;
and then I shall see what God will rescue you out of my hands.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>From the abundance of his heart he poured forth these evil
words; but by this he raised my hopes, just the opposite effect to
what he wanted.<note place='foot'>Even the gentle Father Southwell could not but show his estimate of this
reprobate man. We translate the following from Father More's <hi rend='italic'>History of the
English Province</hi>, l. v., n. 15. <q>Though he readily answered the questions
of others, yet if Topcliffe interposed he never deigned him a reply; and when
asked the cause of this, he answered: <q>Because I have found by experience
that the man is not open to reason.</q></q></note> Neither then nor since have I ever reckoned
aught of a blasphemer; and, in sooth, I have found by experience,
that God increases the confidence of His servants, when
He allows strife to rise up against them. I gave, therefore, this
short answer: <q>You will be able to do nothing without the
leave of God, Who never abandons those that hope in Him.
The will of God be done.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thereupon Young called the gaoler who had brought me, to
take me back to prison. As he was leading me off, Topcliffe
addressed him and bade him put irons on my legs. Both then
<pb n='lxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxiv'/>
fell a-chiding him for having brought me by himself, fearing
perchance lest I should escape from his hands. When I had crept
back to my little closet, my legs were garnished according to order.
The man seemed grieved that put the fetters on. For my part,
instead of grief I felt very much joy, such is God's goodness to
the most unworthy of His creatures. To pay the man for the kind
turn that he had done me, I gave him some money for his job;
and told him it was no punishment to suffer in so good a cause.</q>
</p>

<p>
Father Garnett described this act of faith and courage in the
following terms in a letter to the General of the Society, which we
translate from the Italian: <q>This Father has always been very
courageous, and when he was first taken, and the gaoler put
very heavy irons on his legs, he gave him some money. The
following day, the gaoler, thinking that if he took off the irons
doubtless he would give him more, took them off, but got nothing.
After some days he came to put them on again, and received a
reward, and then taking them off did not get a farthing. They
went on playing thus with one another several times, but at last
the gaoler, seeing that he did not give him anything for taking
off his irons, left him for a long time in confinement, so that the
great toe of one foot was for almost two years in great danger of
mortification. So your Reverence sees that in these times the
courage of true Christian soldiers is not wanting. May our Lord
give him perseverance, and to those who follow him the grace to
imitate him.</q><note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. ii., n. 27; <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 604.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IX.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Here I stayed upwards of three months. During the first
month I made from memory, as well as I could, the Spiritual
Exercises; giving four and sometimes five hours a day to meditation.
God lavished His goodness on me throughout, and I had
proof that He opens His bounteous hands to His servants most of
all when He has closed up the sources of earthly comfort to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I was quietly lodged in prison, without being brought
out or undergoing any further examination for many days, they
examined and put to the torture Richard Fulwood, whom the
traitor had pointed out as my servant, and Little John, who had
<pb n='lxv'/><anchor id='Pglxv'/>
been taken with me. Unable, either by coaxing or bribery, to
draw anything from them that would compromise others, they
had recourse to threats, and then to force: but the force of the
Holy Ghost in them was too great to be overcome by men.
They were both hung up for three hours together, having their
arms fixed into iron rings, and their bodies hanging in the air; a
torture which causes frightful pain and intolerable extension of
the sinews. It was all to no purpose; no disclosure could be
wrested from them that was hurtful to others; no rewards could
entice, no threats or punishments force them, to discover where I
or any of ours had been harboured, or to name any of our
acquaintances or abettors.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Here I ought not to pass over in silence God's great
goodness and mercy to me, the most unworthy of all His servants.
It was shown in this, that there was not a single traitor, either
among those that were then seized in my house or in the house of
the good gentleman, my entertainer; no, nor even among those
that, in the other persecutions which by God's providence afterwards
befel me, were imprisoned, tortured, and treated with the
utmost cruelty. Not one of them, I say, ever yielded, but all, by
the grace of God, held steadfast through everything. Those
who were my companions, or the servants I intrusted with
commissions to the gentlemen of my acquaintance, as they
necessarily knew all my friends, would have been able to do very
great mischief, and enrich themselves by ruining others: yet not
one of them ever caused any harm either by word or deed,
wittingly or unwittingly; nor, as far as I remember, did they
ever give one cause of complaint. On many of them God, in
His goodness, poured the choicest gifts of His Holy Spirit.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>John Lasnet, the first that I had, died in Spain a Lay-brother
of the Society. The second that I had for some little
while was Michael Walpole, who is now a Priest of the Society,
and labouring in England. The third was named [Ralph]
Willis. He had a vocation, so I sent him to study in the
Seminary at Rhemes, where he went through his course of
philosophy. His behaviour there was orderly, but afterwards at
Rome he joined a turbulent party, thus returning evil for good.
He was the only one of my helpmates that walked at all awry.
<pb n='lxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxvi'/>
He was, however, made Priest, and sent into England. There he
was seized, and condemned to death for the Faith, and answered
unflinchingly before the tribunal; but instead of losing his life, he
was kept some time in prison; whence he effected his escape,
and is still labouring in England.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After him I had a godly man of the name of John Sutton,
the brother of three Priests, one of whom was a martyr, and
another died in the Society. Father Garnett kept him in his
house for many years, up to the time of his own arrest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The next that I had was Richard Fulwood, of whom I have
spoken above. He managed to make his escape, and during my
imprisonment was employed by Father Garnett until that Father's
happy death. He managed nearly all his master's business with
strangers, not without the knowledge of the persecutors, who
offered a handsome sum for his capture, and were still more
anxious about it after Father Garnett was taken. In fact, they
gave the poor man no peace until they drove him into banishment,
where he yet remains, doing good service to our mission
notwithstanding.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After him I had John Lilly, a man well known at Rome; he
died lately in England, a Lay-brother of the Society. Next came
two other godly men, whom I did not take to keep, but merely as
makeshifts till I could get a man every way suited to my wants,
and endowed with a religious spirit. I found one at length; and
when I quitted England, I took him with me, and left him at
St. Omers. There he was well grounded in Greek and Latin, and
became a great favourite with all the Fathers, who sent him into
Spain with the highest recommendations. He still remains there,
growing always in virtue and learning. Not long ago I had a
letter from the Father Prefect of Studies, in which he tells me
that he is the best student in his course.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Such were the mercies of God vouchsafed to His unworthy
servant, in answer to my constant prayers. Many gentlemen
intrust themselves and their interests to our servants' good faith
no less than to ours; so that there could be no greater let or
hindrance to our good work, than any treachery on their part;
indeed, the defection of such a one would be likely to cause the
most frightful ruin among Catholics. For if one servant, and he
<pb n='lxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxvii'/>
neither a Catholic nor one of the household, like the traitor of
whom I have spoken, made such havoc in his master's family,
what mischief could a Priest's servant do to the many persons of
high rank that had harboured him and his master! God has
hitherto kept me free from the like betrayal.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To return to my story. They could wrest nothing out of
Little John and Fulwood; and none of my host's Catholic
servants would make any avowal, or own that he knew me.
Seeing that they could bring no witness against him, they
gradually lost the hope they had of seizing his chattels and
revenue.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sometimes they would bring me up for examination, when
they had anything new against me. Once they called me to try on
a suit of clothes, which had been found in my host's house, and
which the traitor said were mine. I put them on, and they were
just a fit, for the truth was that they had been made for me;
however, I would not own them, nor admit them to be mine.
Hereupon Young flew into a passion, called me a headstrong
and unreasonable man. He was so barefaced as to add <q>How
much more sensible is Southwell, who after long wilfulness is now
ready to conform, and wishes to treat with some man of learning.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Nay,</q> I answered, <q>I will never believe that Father Southwell
wishes to treat with any one from any wavering in his faith,
or to learn what to believe from a heretic; but he might
perchance challenge any heretic to dispute with him that dared,
as Father Campion did, and as many others would do if you
would let them, and appoint proper umpires.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then Young seized hold of the book, and kissing it, cried:
<q>I swear upon this book that Southwell has offered to treat, with
a view of embracing our religion.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I do not believe he ever did so,</q> said I.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What,</q> said an officer of the Court, <q>do you not believe his
oath?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No,</q> was my reply, <q>I neither can nor will believe him; for
I have a better opinion of Father Southwell's firmness than of
his truthfulness; since perhaps he thinks that he is allowed to
make this statement to beguile me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No such thing,</q> said Young; <q>but are you ready to conform
<pb n='lxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxviii'/>
if he has done so?</q> (To conform, in their sense, means to
embrace their deformed religion.)</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Certainly not,</q> I answered; <q>for if I keep myself free
from heresy and heretical meetings, it is not because he or any
man on earth does the same; but because to act otherwise would
be to deny Christ, by denying His faith, which may be done by
deed as well as by word. This is what our Lord forbade under
pain of a heavier punishment than man can inflict, when He said,
<q>He that shall deny Me before men, him will I deny before My
Father Who is in Heaven.</q></q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To this the heretic answered not a word, save that I was
stiff-necked (a name that was applicable rather to himself), and
bade them take me back to prison.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Another time I was sent for to be confronted with three
witnesses, servants of a certain nobleman named Lord Henry
Seymour, son of the Duke of Somerset. They were heretics, and
avouched that on a certain day I had dined with their mistress
and her sister, while they, among others, waited at table. The
two sisters were daughters of the Earl of Northumberland. One
of them was a devout Catholic, and had come to London a little
before my imprisonment to get my help in passing over to
Belgium, there to consecrate herself to God. She was staying at
the house of her sister, the wife of the aforesaid lord. She
wanted to bring back this sister to the Catholic faith, which the
latter had abandoned after her good father's death. I dined with
them on the day the witnesses mentioned. It was in Lent; and
they told how their mistress ate meat, while the Lady Mary and I
ate nothing but fish. Young flung this charge in my teeth with
an air of triumph, as though I could not help acknowledging it,
and thereby disclosing some of my acquaintances. I answered
that I did not know the men whom he had brought up.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But we know you,</q> said they, <q>to be the same that was at
such a place on such a day.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You wrong your mistress,</q> said I, <q>in saying so. I, however,
will not so wrong her.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What a barefaced fellow you are!</q> exclaimed Young.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Doubtless,</q> I answered, <q>were these men's statements true.
As for me, I cannot in conscience speak positively in the matter,
<pb n='lxix'/><anchor id='Pglxix'/>
for reasons that I have often alleged; let them look to the truth
and justice of what they say.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Young then, in a rage, remanded me to prison.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After three months some of my friends made efforts to have me
removed to another more comfortable prison, seeing that nothing
could be proved against me except my Priesthood; and this they
obtained by means of a handsome bribe to Young. So they sent
to my prison, which was called the Counter, and took off my
fetters. These were rusty when they were first put on; but by
wearing and moving about in them every day, I had rendered
them quite bright and shining. My cell was so small, that a man
who had his legs free, might take the whole length of it in three
steps. I used to shuffle from one end to the other, as well for
exercise, as because the people underneath used to sing lewd
songs and Geneva psalms; and I wanted to drown by the
clanking of my chain a noise that struck still more harshly on
my ear. My fetters then being removed, and my expenses paid
(which were not great, as I had had little but butter and cheese
to season my bread withal), they brought me before Young, who,
making a show of anger, began to chide and upbraid me more
than was his wont, and asked me whether I was yet willing to
acknowledge where and with whom I had lived. I answered that
I could not do so with a safe conscience, and therefore would not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well then,</q> said he, <q>I will put you in closer confinement,
where you shall be safer lodged, and have iron bars before your
window.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Forthwith he wrote a warrant, and sent me to the prison
that is called the Clink.<note place='foot'>This was a prison in Southwark, adjoining the palace of the Bishops of
Winchester. In Father More's Latin Narrative it appears as <hi rend='italic'>Atrium Wintoniense</hi>.
<q>It was a small place of confinement on the Bankside, called the
Clink from being the prison of the <q>Clink liberty or manor of Southwark,</q>
belonging to the Bishops of Winchester</q> (Brayley, <hi rend='italic'>History of Surrey</hi>, vol. 5,
p. 348).</note> He made all this show, that he might
not appear to have taken money for what he did. The fact was,
that the prison to which I was now sent was far better than the
other, and more comfortable for all prisoners; but to me it
afforded especial comfort, on account of the great number of
Catholics whom I found there.</q>
</p>

<pb n='lxx'/><anchor id='Pglxx'/>

<p>
<q>They could not now hinder me from approaching the Sacraments,
and being comforted in divers other ways, as I shall
afterwards show; for when I had been there a few months, the
place was by God's grace so improved, that as for discharging all
the duties of the Society, I should never wish to be at large in
England, provided I could always live in the like prison and
after the like fashion.<note place='foot'>Father Garnett writes, Nov. 19, 1594: <q>Sir Thomas Wilks goeth into
Flanders, as it is thought for peace; whereupon the arraignment of the three
Jesuits, Southwell, Walpole, and Gerard, is stayed. Gerard is in the Clink,
somewhat free; the other two so close in the Tower that none can hear from
them</q> (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, ii., p. 550).</note> So my being shut up in the Clink seemed
like a change from Purgatory to Paradise. Instead of lewd songs
and blasphemies, the prayers of some Catholic neighbours in the
next room met my ear. They came to my door to cheer me up,
and showed me a way by which we could open a free communication.
This was through a hole in the wall, which they had
covered with a picture, that it might not be seen. By means of
it they gave me on the morrow a letter from my friends; and at
the same time furnished me with materials for writing back. I
wrote, therefore, to Father Garnett, and told him the whole truth
of what had happened to me, and what manner of replies I had
made, as I have set forth above.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I also confessed, and received the Most Holy Body of
Christ, through that same hole. But I had not to do this long,
for the Catholics contrived to fashion a key that would open my
door; and then every morning, before the gaoler got up, they
brought me to another part of the prison, where I said Mass,
and administered the Sacraments to the prisoners lodged in
that quarter; for all of them had got keys of their cells.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I had just such neighbours as I would have picked out had
I had my choice. My next-door neighbour was our Brother,
Ralph Emerson, of whom Father Campion, in a letter to Father
General, makes mention in these terms, <q>My little man and I.</q>
He was indeed small in body,<note place='foot'><q>There is a little fellow called Ralph, who is in England for Father
Persons, is a great dealer for all the Papists; he is a very slender, brown little
fellow</q> (Confession of Ralph Miller. P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 173,
n. 64).</note> but in steadfastness and endurance
<pb n='lxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxi'/>
he was great. He had been already many long years in bonds,
ever keeping godly and devout, like a man of the Society: and
after my coming to the Clink, he remained six or seven years
more. At last he was sent off, with other confessors of Christ, to
the Castle of Wisbech, where he was attacked with palsy. One
half of his body was powerless, so that he could not move about
or do the least thing for himself. He lived, notwithstanding, to
add by his patience fresh jewels to the crown that awaited him.
Being driven into banishment with the same company, he came
to St. Omers, and died a holy death there, to the great edification
of the by-standers. I found this good Brother my next neighbour
in the Clink; overhead I had John Lilly, whom God's providence
had shut up there for his own good and mine. I had other godly
men around me, all true to their faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>These having the free run of the prison, any one might visit
them without danger. I arranged, therefore, that when any of
my friends came to the prison, they should ask to see one of
these; and thus they got to have talk with me without its being
noticed. I did not, however, let them into my room, but spoke
to them through the aforesaid hole.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So I passed some time in great comfort and repose; striving
the while to gather fruit of souls, by letter and by word of mouth.
My first gaoler was a sour-tempered man, who watched very
closely to see that there were no unlawful doings amongst us.
This called for great wariness on our part, to avoid discovery;
but ere long God summoned him from the wardenship of the
prison, and from the prison of his body at the same time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>His successor was a younger man of a milder turn. What
with coaxing, and what with bribes, I got him not to look into
our doings too nicely, and not to come when he was not called
for, except at certain fixed times, at which he always found me
ready to receive him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I used the liberty thus granted me for my neighbour's profit.
I began to hear many confessions, and reconciled many persons
to the Catholic Church. Some of them were heretics, but the
greater number were only schismatics, as I could deal more
freely with these than with the others. It was only after long
acquaintance, and on the recommendation of trusty friends, that
<pb n='lxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxii'/>
I would let any heretics know how little restraint was put upon
me. I do not remember above eight or ten converts from heresy,
of whom four entered Religion. Two joined our Society, and the
other two went into other Orders. As for schismatics, I brought
back a goodly number of them to the bosom of the Church.
Some became Religious: and others gave themselves to good
works in England during the persecution. Of these last was
Mr. John Rigby, afterwards martyred.</q><note place='foot'>John Rigby suffered at St. Thomas' Watering, June 21, 1600, for having
been reconciled by a Catholic Priest.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>X.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>During my stay in this prison, I found means to give the
Spiritual Exercises. The gaoler did as I wished him to do; he
never came to me without being called, and never went into my
neighbours' rooms at all. So we fitted an upper chamber to serve
as a chapel, where six or seven made the Exercises, all of whom
resolved to follow the counsels of Christ our Lord, and not one of
them flinched from his purpose.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I found means also to provide for a very pressing need.
Many Priests of my acquaintance, being unable to meet with safe
lodgings when they came to London, used to put up at inns till
they had settled the business that brought them. Again, as my
abode was fixed, and easy to find, the greater part of the Priests
that were sent from the Seminaries abroad had instructions to
apply to me, that through me they might be introduced to their
Superior, and might receive other assistance at my hands. Not
having always places prepared, nor houses of Catholics to which
I could send them, I rented a house and garden in a suitable
spot, and furnished it, as far as was wanted, by the help of my
friends. Thither I used to send those who brought letters of
recommendation from our Fathers, and who I was assured led a
holy life and seemed well fitted for the mission. I maintained
them there till I had supplied them, through the aid of certain
friends, with clothes and necessaries, sometimes even with a
residence, or with a horse to go to their friends and kinsmen in
the country. I covered all the expenses of this house with the
<pb n='lxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxiii'/>
alms that were bestowed on me. I did not receive alms from
many persons, still less from all that came to see me; indeed,
both out of prison and in prison, I often refused such offers.
I was afraid that if I always accepted what was offered, I might
scare from me souls that wished to treat with me on the business
of their salvation; or receive gifts from those that could either
ill afford it, or would afterwards repent of it. I made it a rule,
therefore, never to take alms except from a small number of
persons, whom I knew well. Most of what I got was from those
devoted friends, who offered me not only their money but themselves,
and looked upon it as a favour when I took their offer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I gave charge of this house to a very godly and discreet
matron of good birth, whom the Lord honoured with martyrdom.<note place='foot'>Ann Line executed at Tyburn, Feb. 27, 1601, for harbouring a Catholic
Priest. <q>She told her confessor, some years before her death, that Mr.
Thomson (Blackburn), a former confessor of hers, who ended his days by
martyrdom in 1586, had promised her, that if God should make him worthy
of that glorious end he would pray for her, that she might obtain the like
happiness</q> (Challoner, from Champney's MS. History).</note>
Her maiden name was Heigham, but she bore the name of Line
from her deceased husband. Both she and her husband were
beloved by God, and had much to suffer for His sake. This
lady's father was a Protestant, and when he heard of his
daughter's becoming a Catholic, he withheld the dower which
he had promised her. He disinherited one of his sons for the
same reason. This son, called William Heigham, is now in
Spain, a Lay-brother of the Society. It is twenty-six years since
I knew him. He was then a well-educated gentleman, finely
dressed like other high-born Londoners. He supported a Priest
named Thomson, whom I afterwards saw martyred. As soon as
his father learned that he, too, had become a Catholic, he went
and sold his estate, the rents of which were reckoned at 6,000
florins [600<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] yearly, that it might not pass to his son. The son was
afterwards arrested for the Faith; and he and his Priest together,
if I mistake not, were thrown into the prison of Bridewell, where
vagrants are shut up and put to hard labour under the lash.
I paid him a visit there, and found him toiling at the tread-mill,
all covered with sweat. On recovering his freedom he hired
himself out as a servant to a gentleman, that had to wife a
<pb n='lxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxiv'/>
Catholic lady whom I knew. She intrusted her son to his care:
he taught the boy the ground-work of the Latin tongue, besides
giving him lessons on the harp, which he himself touched
admirably. I went to see him in this situation, and had a long
talk with him about his call to his present state.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Mistress Line, his sister, married a good husband and a
staunch Catholic. He had been heir to a fine estate; but his
father or uncle (for he was heir to both) sent a message from his
death-bed to young Line, then a prisoner for the Faith, asking him
to conform and go to some heretical church for once; otherwise
he would have to give up his inheritance to his younger brother.
<q>If I must either give up God or the world,</q> was his courageous
answer, <q>I prefer to give up the world, for it is good to cleave
unto God.</q> So both his father's and his uncle's estate went to his
younger brother. I saw this latter once in his elder brother's
room, dressed in silk and other finery, while his brother had on
plain and mean clothes. This good man afterwards went into
Belgium, where he obtained a pension from the King of Spain,
part of which he sent to his wife; and thus they lived a poor and
holy life. His death, which happened in Belgium, left his widow
friendless, so that she had to look to Providence for her support.
Before my imprisonment she had been charitably taken by my
entertainers into their own house. They furnished her with board
and lodging, and I made up the rest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>She was just the sort of person that I wanted as head of the
house that I have spoken of, to manage the money matters, take
care of the guests, and meet the inquiries of strangers. She had
good store of charity and wariness, and in great patience she
possessed her soul. She was nearly always ill from one or other
of many divers diseases, which purified her and made her ready
for Heaven. She used often to say to me: <q>Though I desire
above all things to die for Christ, I dare not hope to die by the
hand of the executioner; but perhaps the Lord will let me be
taken some time in the same house with a Priest, and then be
thrown into a chill and filthy dungeon, where I shall not be able
to last out long in this wretched life.</q> Her delight was in the
Lord, and the Lord granted her the desires of her heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I was rescued out of prison, she gave up the management
<pb n='lxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxv'/>
of my house; for then so many people knew who she was,
that her being in a place was enough to render it unsafe for me.
So a room was hired for her in another person's house, where
she often used to harbour Priests. One day (it was the Feast
of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin) she let in a great many
Catholics to hear Mass, a thing which she would never have
done in my house. Good soul, she was more careful of me
than of herself. Some neighbours noticed the throng, and called
the constables. They went upstairs into the room, which they
found full of people. The celebrant was Father Francis Page,
S.J., who was afterwards martyred.<note place='foot'>Francis Page, S.J., suffered at Tyburn, April 20, 1602, for his Priesthood.</note> He had pulled off his
vestments before the Priest-hunters came in; so that they could
not readily make out which was the Priest. However, from the
Father's grave and modest look, they thought that he must be
their man. Accordingly, they laid hold of him, and began
questioning him and the others also. No one would own that
there was a Priest there; but as the altar had been found ready
for Mass, they acknowledged that they had been waiting for a
Priest to come. While the Catholics and their persecutors were
wrangling on this point, Father Francis Page, taking advantage
of some one's opening the door, got away from those that held
him and slipped out, shutting the door behind him. He then
went upstairs to a place that he knew, where Mrs. Line had had
a hiding-place made, and there he ensconced himself. Search
was made for him the whole house over, to no purpose.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So they took Mrs. Line and the richer ones of the party
to prison, and let the others go on bail. God lengthened out
the martyr's life beyond her expectation. It was some months
before she was brought to trial, on a charge of harbouring and
supporting Priests. To the question of <q>guilty or not guilty,</q> she
made no direct answer, but cried out in a loud voice, so that
all could hear her: <q>My lords, nothing grieves me, but that I
could not receive a thousand more.</q><note place='foot'>These words are given in the MS. in English.</note> She listened to the sentence
of death with great show of joy and thanksgiving to the Lord
God. She was so weak, that she had to be carried to Court in
<pb n='lxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxvi'/>
a chair, and sat there during the whole of the trial. After her
return to prison, a little before her death, she wrote to Father
Page, who had escaped. The letter is in my hands at present.
She disposed therein of the few things that she had, leaving to
me a fine large cross of gold that had belonged to her husband.
She mentioned me thrice in the letter, calling me her Father.
She also left some few debts which she begged me to see paid.
Afterwards she bequeathed me her bed by word of mouth. I
wanted to purchase it from the gaolers, who had plundered
everything found in her cell after her death; but I could only
get the coverlet, which I used ever after during my stay in
London, and reckoned it no small safeguard.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Being arrived at the place of punishment, some preachers
wanted to tease her, as usual, with warnings to abandon her
errors; but she cut them short, saying, <q>Away! I have no
dealings nor communion with you.</q> Then, kissing the gallows
with great joy, she knelt down to pray, and kept on praying
till the hangman had done his duty. So she gave up her soul
to God, along with the martyr Father Filcock, S.J.,<note place='foot'>Roger Filcock, S.J., <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Arthur, executed for his Priesthood, with
Mark Barkworth, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Lambert, O.S.B., and Ann Line, at Tyburn, Feb. 27,
1601.</note> who had
often been her confessor, and had always been her friend. Her
martyrdom, however, happened six or seven years after the time
of which I am now speaking. She managed my house for three
years, and received therein many holy Priests.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I always had a Priest residing in this house, whom I used
to send to assist and console my friends, as I was unable, during
my imprisonment, to visit them myself. The first I had there
was Father Jones, a Franciscan Recollect, afterwards martyred,<note place='foot'>John Jones, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Buckley, suffered at St. Thomas' Watering, July 12,
1598; and Robert Drury at Tyburn, Feb. 26, 1607, for being Priests in
England.</note>
but then newly arrived in England.... After him I received
another Priest, lately arrived from Spain, and formerly known to
me, Robert Drury by name. He was of gentle birth and well
educated, and could consequently associate with gentlemen
without causing any suspicion. I introduced him, therefore, to
my chief friends; and he assisted them well and zealously for
<pb n='lxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxvii'/>
two years and more that he tarried in my house. This good
Priest also God chose to be His witness and martyr....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In that house of mine, while I was in prison, there lived
awhile one of our Fathers, who was in ill health, Father John
Curry. There also he died, and there he lies buried in some
secret corner. For those Priests who live secretly on the mission,
we are obliged also to bury secretly when they die.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>All this while my good host, who had been taken a little
before me, was kept imprisoned; and for the first four months
so straitly, that neither his wife nor any of his friends were
allowed to have any access to him. After this, however, the
persecutors, seeing that they could not produce any proof against
him, because none of the Catholic servants would acknowledge
anything and the traitor had never seen me in Priest's guise, and
was only one witness after all, by degrees relaxed a little of
their harshness, and permitted him to be visited and cared for,
though they still kept him in strict custody.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>While thus close shut up, he wrote a work by no means
contemptible, which he divided into three parts, and called
<q>Three Farewells to the world, or three deaths in different
states of soul.</q><note place='foot'>Tres valedictiones mundo datæ a tribus in diverso statu morientibus (MS.).</note> In the first book he described a man of moral
life, and virtuous in the opinion of men, but directing himself
in all things by his own lights.... In the second book he
described a good and pious lady, who at first wished to be
guided in everything, but subsequently, deceived by the devil,
determined in some things to follow her own ideas.... In
the third book he described the death of a pious and devoted
man, who, though living in the world and possessed of riches,
yet always sought and followed the counsels of his spiritual
Father, manifesting himself entirely for the purpose of being
directed by him to the greater glory of God.</q> ...
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It was written, not with ink, but merely with pencil, upon
loose scraps of paper, for at that time he was kept so close
that he could get no ink. As he finished each of the three
parts, he sent it to me, that I might correct anything I might
find against sound doctrine. He gave as a reason for writing
the work, that he had himself found, as he thought, so immense
<pb n='lxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxviii'/>
a benefit from giving himself thoroughly to the direction of his
spiritual guide, and had felt in consequence so undisturbed a
peace of mind, even when the malice of the persecutors was
daily threatening him with death, that he could not refrain from
recommending the same course to others whom he loved. He
said, moreover, that he wrote the book, not for the public, but
principally for his own family, and secondly for his relations
and friends; for that, as he could not communicate with them
by word of mouth, he desired to show them in writing the most
secure and meritorious way to perfection while living in the world.
For he endeavoured to prove that perfection was even more
necessary for those who lived in the world than for Religious.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Such were the sentiments of this good man. He noways
regretted that he had during four years given himself up to my
direction, though he found himself in consequence exposed to
such extreme distresses, and saw his family and fortune made
a mark for the persecutors as a result of having harboured me.
Nay, it was not only that he bore all these trials patiently, but
he really thought it all joy to suffer thus for the good cause.
His wife, also, though she loved her husband most tenderly, and
was of a peculiarly sensitive mind, yet in this juncture bore
everything with a singular sweetness and patience. After I was
transferred to the Clink, where there was more chance of communicating
with me either by word or letter, she took a house
in the immediate neighbourhood of my prison, in order that
she might consult me constantly, and provide me with everything
I needed. In this house she and her husband, who obtained
his release after a time by large payments of money, resided
while I remained in that prison. But after my escape from the
Tower, they betook themselves back to their country seat, in
order that they might have me with them there again.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XI.</head>

<p>
<q>In the meantime, I was so fully taken up in the prison with
business, and with the visits of Catholics, that in the next room,
which was Brother Emerson's, there were often six or eight
persons at once, waiting their turn to see me. Nay, many of my
most intimate and attached friends have oft-times had to wait
<pb n='lxxix'/><anchor id='Pglxxix'/>
many hours at a stretch, and even then I have been obliged to
ask them to come another time....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While I remained in this prison, I sent over numbers of
boys and young men to Catholic Seminaries abroad. Some of
these are, at this present, Priests of the Society, and engaged on
the English mission: others still remain in the Seminaries, in
positions of authority, to assist in training labourers for the same
field. On one occasion I had sent two boys on their way to
St. Omers, and had given them letters of recommendation,
written with lemon-juice, so that the writing was not visible on
the paper. In the paper itself I wrapped up a few collars, so that
it might seem that its only use was to keep the collars clean.
The boys were taken, and on being questioned, confessed that I
had sent them. They let it out also that I had given them this
letter, and had told them, when they came to a certain College of
ours, on their way to St. Omers (for they had to pass by
Ostend, which is not the usual way, and thus they came to
be taken), to bid the Fathers steep the paper in water,
and they would be able to read what I had written. On this
information, then, the paper was steeped by the authorities, and
two letters of mine were read, written on the same paper. One
was written in Latin to our Belgian Fathers; this I had consequently
signed with my own proper name. The other was
addressed to our English Fathers at St. Omers. The letters
having been thus discovered, I was sent for to be examined.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Young, however, was no longer to be my examiner. He
had died in his sins, and that most miserably. As he lived, so he
died:<note place='foot'>Qualis vita, finis ita (MS.).</note> he lived the devil's confessor, he died the devil's martyr;
for not only did he die in the devil's service, but he brought on
his death through that very service. He was accustomed to work
night and day to increase the distress of the Catholics, and to go
forth frequently in inclement weather, at one or two o'clock in
the morning, to search their houses. By these labours he fell into
a consumption,<note place='foot'><q>Morbum regium</q> (MS.). Consumption is a form of scrofula, or King's
evil, and seems to be the form most likely to be brought on by the causes here
mentioned. In classical Latin, however, <hi rend='italic'>morbus regius</hi> signifies <hi rend='italic'>jaundice</hi>; and
this may be the meaning here.</note> of which he died. He died, moreover, overwhelmed
<pb n='lxxx'/><anchor id='Pglxxx'/>
with debt, so that it might be clear that he abandoned
all things for the devil's service. Notwithstanding all the emoluments
of his office, all the plunder he took from the persecuted
Catholics, and the large bribes they were constantly giving him to
buy off his malicious oppression, his debts were said to amount
to no less a sum than a hundred thousand florins [10,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>]; and I
have heard even a larger sum mentioned than this. Perhaps he
expected the Queen would pay his debts; but she did nothing of
the sort. All she did was once to send a gentleman from Court to
visit him, when he was confined to his bed, and near death; and
this mark of favour so delighted him, that he seemed ready to
sing <hi rend='italic'>Nunc dimittis</hi>. But it was a false peace, and the lifting up of
the soul that goes before a fall; and like another Aman, he was
bidden not to a banquet, but to execution, and that for ever. So
with his mouth full of the Queen's praises, and his great obligations
to Her Majesty, he died a miserable death, and anguish
took the place of his joy. The joy of the hypocrite is but for an
instant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This man's successor in the office of persecuting and
harassing the servants of God, was William Wade, now Governor
of the Tower of London, but at that time Secretary to the
Lords of the Council. For the members of the Council choose
always to have a man in their service to whose cruelty anything
particularly odious may be attributed, instead of its being
supposed to be done by their warrant. This Wade then sent for
me, and first of all showed me the blank paper that I had given
to the boys, and asked me if I recognized it. I answered, <q>No, I
did not.</q> And in fact I did not recognize it, for I did not know
the boys had been taken. Then he dipped the paper in a basin
of water, and showed me the writing, and my name subscribed in
full. When I saw it, I said: <q>I do not acknowledge the writing.
Any one may easily have counterfeited my handwriting and
forged my signature; and if such boys as you speak of have been
taken, they may perhaps in their terror say anything that their
examiners want them to say, to their own prejudice and that of
their friends; a thing I will never do. At the same time, I do not
deny that it would be a good deed to send such boys abroad to
be better educated; and I would gladly do it if I had the means;
<pb n='lxxxi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxi'/>
but closely confined as I am in prison, I cannot do anything of
the kind, though I should like to do it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He replied to me with a torrent of abuse for denying my
signature and handwriting, and said: <q>In truth, you have far too
much liberty; but you shall not enjoy it long.</q> Then he rated
the gaoler soundly for letting me have so much liberty.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I was sent for on two or three other occasions, to be
examined; and whenever I came out of this prison, I always
wore a Jesuit's cassock and cloak,<note place='foot'><p>Father Bartoli, in his <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi> (bk. v., ch. 13), has the following
passage about Father Gerard, whom he knew personally at Rome: <q>At his
first entrance into this prison (the Clink) he procured himself a habit of the
Society, and continued to wear it from that time forward, even in the face of
all London when he was being taken to his different examinations; so that the
people crowded to see a Jesuit in his habit, while the preachers were all the
more exasperated at what they thought an open defiance of them.</q>
</p>
<p>
Father Weston in his Narrative (Father Laurenson's copy, p. 93) gives it
as one of the signs that warned Catholics that Anthony Tyrrel was wavering
in his faith, that without any necessity, in the Clink prison, he would wear
secular dress. His own clerical costume in prison he mentions as a matter of
course. <q>Egressus sum sequenti die, mutato habitu in sæcularem</q> (p. 98).</p></note> which I had had made as soon
as I came among Catholic fellow-prisoners. The sight of this
dress raised mocks from the boys in the streets, and put my
persecutors in a rage. On the first occasion, they said I was a
hypocrite. I replied: <q>When I was arrested, you called me a
courtier, and said that I had dressed myself in that fashion in
order to disguise my real character, and to be able to deal with
persons of rank in safety, and without being recognized. I told
you then, that I did not like a layman's dress, and would much
rather wear my own. Well, now I am doing so; and you are in a
rage again. In fact, you are not satisfied with either piping or
mourning, but you seek excuses for inveighing against me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To this they answered: <q>Why did you not go about in this
dress before, instead of wearing a disguise, and taking a false
name? A thing no good man would do.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I replied: <q>I am aware you would like us not to do so, in
order that we might be arrested at once, and not be able to do
any good in the work of rescuing and gaining souls. But do you
not know that St. Raphael personated another, and took another
name, in order that, not being known, he might better accomplish
God's work for which he had been sent?</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='lxxxii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At another time I was examined before the Dean of Westminster,
the dignitary who has taken the place of the former
Abbot of the great royal monastery there. Topcliffe and some
other Commissioners were present. Their object was to confront
me with the good widow, my host's mother, of whom I have
before spoken, and who was confined at this time in a prison<note place='foot'>The Gatehouse prison, near the west end of the Abbey, <q>is so called of
two gates, the one out of the College court towards the north, on the east side
whereof was the Bishop of London's prison for clerks convict; and the other
gate, adjoining the first, but towards the west, is a gaol or prison for offenders
thither committed</q> (Stow, p. 176).</note>
near the church at Westminster, for she was not yet condemned
to death; that happened later. They wanted to see if she
recognized me. So when I came into the room where they
brought me, I found her already there. When she saw me coming
in with the gaolers, she almost jumped for joy; but she controlled
herself, and said to them: <q>Is that the person you spoke of? I
do not know him; but he looks like a Priest.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Upon this she made me a very low reverence, and I bowed
in return. Then they asked me if I did not recognize her?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I answered: <q>I do not recognize her. At the same time,
you know this is my usual way of answering, and I will never
mention any places, or give the names of any persons that are
known to me (which this lady, however, is not); because to do
so, as I have told you before, would be contrary both to justice
and charity.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then Topcliffe said: <q>Tell the truth; have you reconciled
any persons to the Church of Rome?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I quite understood his bloodthirsty intention, that being a
thing expressly prohibited under penalty of high treason; but
then I knew I was already as much compromised on account of
my Priesthood, and therefore I answered boldly: <q>Yes, in truth,
I have received some persons, and am sorry that I have not done
this good service to more.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well,</q> said Topcliffe, <q>how many would you like to have
reconciled, if you could? A thousand?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Certainly,</q> I said, <q>a hundred thousand, and many more
still, if I could.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='lxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>That would be enough,</q> said Topcliffe, <q>to levy an army
against the Queen.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Those whom I reconciled,</q> said I, <q>would not be against
the Queen, but all for her; for we hold that obedience to
superiors is of obligation.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No such thing,</q> said Topcliffe, <q>you teach rebellion. See,
I have here a Bull of the Pope, granted to Sanders<note place='foot'>The celebrated theologian and controversialist, Dr. Sanders, was sent as
Papal Legate into Ireland by Gregory XIII. in 1579.</note> when he
went to Ireland to stir up the Queen's subjects to rebellion. See,
here it is. Read it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I answered: <q>There is no need to read it. It is likely
enough that the Pontiff, if he sent him, gave him authority. But
I have no power to meddle at all in such matters. We are
forbidden to have anything to do with such things. I never have,
and never will.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Take and read it,</q> he said; <q>I will have you read it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So I took it, and seeing the name of Jesus on the top, I
reverently kissed it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What,</q> said Topcliffe, <q>you kiss a Bull of the Pope, do
you?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I kissed,</q> said I, <q>the name of Jesus, to which all love and
honour are due. But if it is a Bull of the Pope, as you say, I
reverence it also on that score.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And so saying, I kissed the printed paper again. Then
Topcliffe, in a furious passion, began to abuse me in indecent
terms.... At this insolence, to own the truth, I somewhat lost
command of myself; and though I knew that he had no grounds
which seemed probable even to himself for what he said, but had
uttered it from pure malice, I exclaimed: <q>I call the Great and
Blessed God to witness, that all your insinuations are false.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And, as I spoke, I laid my hand on the book that was open
before me on the table. It was a copy of the Holy Bible, but
according to their corrupt translation into the vulgar tongue.
Then Topcliffe held his peace; but the Dean took up the word.
<q>Are you willing,</q> said he, <q>to be sworn on our Bible?</q> The
better instructed Catholics, who can show the dishonesty of that
translation, usually refuse this.</q>
</p>

<pb n='lxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxiv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I replied: <q>In truth, under the necessity of rebutting this
man's false charges at once, I did not take notice what version
this was. However, there are some truths, as, for instance, the
Incarnation and Passion of Christ, that have not been corrupted
by mistranslation; and by these I call the truth of God to
witness. There are many other things falsely rendered, so as
to involve heresies; and these I detest and anathematize.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So saying, I laid my hand again upon the book, and more
firmly than before. The old man was angry and said: <q>I will
prove that you are a heretic.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I replied: <q>You cannot prove it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I will prove it,</q> he said, <q>thus: Whoever denies Holy
Scripture is a heretic; you deny this to be Holy Scripture: <hi rend='italic'>Ergo</hi>.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I replied: <q>This is no true syllogism; it shifts from general
to particular, and so has four terms.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The old man answered: <q>I could make syllogisms before
you were born.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Very likely,</q> I said; <q>but the one you have just produced
is not a true one.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>However, the good old man<note place='foot'>Gabriel Goodman, Dean of Westminster from 1561 to 1601.</note> would not try a new middle
term, and made no further attempt to prove me a heretic. But
one urged one thing, and another another, not in the way of
argument, but after their usual plan, asking me such questions as
they knew very well I did not like to answer; and then, in the
end, they sent me back to prison.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On another occasion they examined me, and all the other
Catholics that were confined in the same prison with me, in a
public place called Guildhall, where Topcliffe and several other
Commissioners were present. When they had put their usual
questions, and received from me the usual answers, they came to
the point, intending, I imagine, to sound us all as to our feelings
towards the State, or else to entrap us in some expressions about
the State that might be made matter of accusation. They asked
me, then, whether I acknowledged the Queen as the true Governor
and Queen of England.</q>
</p>

<pb n='lxxxv'/><anchor id='Pglxxxv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I answered: <q>I do acknowledge her as such.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What,</q> said Topcliffe, <q>in spite of Pius V.'s excommunication?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I answered: <q>I acknowledge her as our Queen, notwithstanding
I know there is such an excommunication.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The fact was, I knew that the operation of that excommunication
had been suspended for all in England by a declaration of
the Pontiff, till such time as its execution became possible.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Topcliffe proceeded: <q>What would you do in case the Pope
sent an army into England, asserting that the object was solely
to bring back the kingdom to the Catholic religion, and protesting
that there was no other way left of introducing the Catholic faith,
and, moreover, commanding all in virtue of his Apostolical
authority to aid his cause? Whose side would you then take,
the Pope's or the Queen's?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I saw the malicious man's cunning, and that his aim was,
that whichever way I answered I might injure myself, either in
soul or body; and so I worded my reply thus: <q>I am a true
Catholic, and a true subject of the Queen. If, then, this were to
happen, which is unlikely, and which I think will never be the
case, I would act as became a true Catholic and a true subject.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Nay, nay,</q> said he; <q>answer positively and to the point.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I have declared my mind,</q> said I, <q>and no other answer
will I make.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On this he flew into a most violent rage, and vomited out a
torrent of curses; and ended by saying: <q>You think you will
creep to kiss the Cross this year; but before the time comes, I
will take good care you do no such thing.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He meant to intimate, in the abundance of his charity, that
he would take care I should go to Heaven by the rope before
that time. But he had not been admitted into the secrets of
God's sanctuary, and did not know my great unworthiness.
Though God had permitted him to execute his malice on others,
whom the Divine Wisdom knew to be worthy and well prepared,
as on Father Southwell and others, whom he pursued to the
death, yet no such great mercy of God came to me from his
anger. Others indeed, for whom a kingdom was prepared by
the Father, were advanced to Heaven by our Lord Jesus
<pb n='lxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvi'/>
through his means; but this heavenly gift was too great for
an angry man to be allowed to bestow on me. However, he
was really in some sort a prophet in uttering these words, though
he meant them differently from the sense in which they were
fulfilled.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What I have mentioned happened about Christmas. In the
following Lent, he himself was thrown into prison for disrespect to
the members of the Queen's Council, on an occasion, if I mistake
not, when he had pleaded too boldly in behalf of his only son,
who had killed a man with his sword in the great hall of the
Court of Queen's Bench. This took place about Passion Sunday.
We, then, who were in prison for the Faith, seeing our enemy,
Aman, about to be hanged on his own gibbet, began to lift up our
heads, and to use what liberty we had a little more freely, and we
admitted a greater number to the Sacraments, and to assist at the
services and holy rites of the Church. Thus it was that on Good
Friday a large number of us were together in the room over
mine, in fact, all the Catholics in the prison, and a number of
others from without. I had gone through all the service, and said
all the prayers appointed for the day, up to the point where the
Priest has to lay aside his shoes. I had put them off, and had
knelt down, and was about to creep towards the Cross and make
the triple adoration of it; when, lo! just as I had moved two
paces, the head gaoler came and knocked at the door of my room
underneath, and as I did not answer from within, he began to
batter violently at the door and make a great noise. As soon as
I heard it, I knew that the chief gaoler was there, because no
other would have ventured to behave in that way to me: so I
sent some one to say that I would come directly, and then,
instead of going on with the adoration of the material Cross,
I hastened to the spiritual cross that God presented to me, and
taking off the sacred vestments that I was wearing, I went down
with speed, for fear the gaoler might come up after me, and find a
number of others, who would thus have been brought into trouble.
When he saw me, he said in a loud tone of voice: <q>How comes
it that I find you out of your room, when you ought to be kept
strictly confined to it?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As I knew the nature of the man, I pretended, in reply, to
<pb n='lxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxvii'/>
be angry, that one who professed to be a friend should have come
at such a time as that, when, if ever, we were bound to be busy at
our prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What,</q> said he, <q>you were at Mass, were you? I will go
and see.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No such thing,</q> I said; <q>you seem to know very little of
our ways. There is not a single Mass said to-day throughout the
whole Church. Go up if you like; but understand that, if you
do, neither I nor any one of the Catholics will ever pay anything
for our rooms. You may put us all, if you like, in the common
prison of the poor who do not pay. But you will be no gainer
by that; whereas, if you act in a friendly way with us, and do not
come upon us unawares in this manner, you will not find us
ungrateful, as you have not found us hitherto.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He softened down a little at this; and then I said: <q>What
have you come for now, I pray.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Surely,</q> said he, <q>to greet you from Master Topcliffe.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>From him?</q> I said; <q>and how is it that he and I are such
great friends? Is he not in such a prison? He cannot do
anything against me just now, I fancy.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No,</q> said the gaoler, <q>he cannot. But he really sends to
greet you. When I visited him to-day, he asked me how you
were. I replied that you were very well. <q>But he does not
bear his imprisonment,</q> said Master Topcliffe, <q>as patiently as I
do mine. I would have you greet him, then, in my name, and
tell him what I have said.</q> So I have come now for the purpose
of repeating his message to you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Very well,</q> I replied. <q>Now tell him from me, that by the
grace of God I willingly bear my imprisonment for the cause of
the Faith, and I could wish his cause were the same.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thereupon the gaoler went away, rating his servant, however,
for not having kept me more closely confined. And thus Topcliffe
really accomplished what he had promised, having checked me in
the very act of adoration, although without thinking of what he
said, and with another intent at the time. Thus was Saul among
the prophets. However, he did not prevent my going up again
and completing what I had begun.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The man who had charge of my room would not do anything
<pb n='lxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pglxxxviii'/>
in our rooms without my leave. And after my first gaoler, who
soon died, the others who succeeded were well disposed to oblige
me. One of them, who had the gaolership by inheritance, I made
a Catholic. He immediately gave up his post and sold the right
of succession, and became the attendant of a Catholic gentleman,
a friend of mine, and afterwards accompanied his son to Italy,
and got a vocation to the Religious state. At present he is a
prisoner in the very prison where he had been my gaoler. The
next who had the charge of me after him, being a married man
with children, was kept by fear of poverty from becoming a
Catholic; but yet he was afterwards so attached to myself and all
our friends, that he received us into his own house, and sometimes
concealed there such Catholics as were more sorely pressed than
others by the persecution. And when I was to be got out of the
Tower of London, with serious risk to all who aided the enterprise,
he himself in person was one of the three who exposed themselves
to such great danger. And although he was nearly drowned the first
night of the attempt, he rowed the boat the next night as before,
as I shall hereafter relate. For not long after what I just now
mentioned, I was removed from that prison to the Tower of
London; the occasion of which was the following.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XIII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There was in the prison with me a certain Priest,<note place='foot'>William Atkinson, the apostate Priest, in a letter to Blackwell the Archpriest,
dated Apr. 9, 1602, said that he was in prison with Father Gerard
(Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, p. 416). This man dared to offer to poison the Earl of
Tyrone in a host (P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 251, n. 49).</note> to whom I
had done many good services. When he first came to England,
I had lodged him in an excellent house with some of my best
friends; I had made Catholics of his mother and only brother; I
had secured him a number of friends when he was thrown into
prison, and had made him considerable presents. I had always
shown him affection, although, perceiving that he was not firm
and steady in spirit, but rather hankered too much after freedom,
I did not deal confidently with him, as with others in the prison,
especially Brother Emerson and John Lilly. Nevertheless, this
good man, from some motive or other, procured my removal;
<pb n='lxxxix'/><anchor id='Pglxxxix'/>
whether in the desire and expectation that, if I were gone, all
whom he saw come to me would thenceforth come to him, or in
order to curry favour with our enemies, and obtain liberty or some
such boon for himself, is not certain. Be that as it may, he
reported to our enemies that he was standing by when I handed
a packet of letters dated from Rome and Brussels to a servant of
Father Garnett's, of the name of Little John, about whom I have
before spoken. This latter, after having been arrested in my
company, as I have related, and subjected to various examinations,
but without disclosing anything, had been released for a sum of
money which some Catholic gentlemen had paid. For his services
were indispensable to them and many others, as he was a first-rate
hand at contriving Priests' hiding-places. The Priest then reported
that I had given this man letters, and that I was in the habit
of receiving letters from beyond the sea addressed both to my
Superior and to myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Acting on this information, the persecutors sent a Justice of
the Peace to me one day, with two Queen's messengers, or
pursuivants as they call them. These came up to my room on
a sudden with the head gaoler; but by God's providence they
found no one with me at the time except two boys, whom I was
instructing with intention to send them abroad; one of whom, if
I remember right, escaped, the other they imprisoned for a time.
But they found nothing else in my room that I was afraid of
being seen; for I was accustomed to keep all my manuscripts
and other articles of importance in some holes made to hide
things. All these holes were known to Brother Emerson; and
so after my removal he took out everything, and among the rest a
reliquary that I have with me now, and a store of money that
I had in hand for the expenses of my house in town, of which I
have before spoken, to the amount of thirteen hundred florins
[130<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>]. This money he sent to my Superior, who took charge of
the house from that time till I was got out of prison.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When these officials came in they began to question me;
and when the examination was over, which it soon was, as they
could get nothing from me of what they wanted to know, they
began to search the room all over, to find letters or something
else, that might serve their turn and injure me. While the Justice
<pb n='xc'/><anchor id='Pgxc'/>
of the Peace was rummaging my books, one of the pursuivants
searched my person, and opening my doublet, he discovered my
hairshirt. At first he did not know what it was, and said:
<q>What is this?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>A shirt,</q> I replied.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Ho, ho!</q> said he, <q>it is a hairshirt.</q> And he caught
hold of it, and wanted to drag it off my body by force.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This insolence of the varlet, to confess my imperfection
honestly, excited me more than anything that I have ever had to
endure from my enemies, and I was within a little of thrusting
him violently back; but I checked myself by God's grace, and
claimed the Justice's protection, who immediately made him give
over. So they sought, but found nothing in my room that they
sought for except myself; and me they took at once, and went
straight to the Tower of London with me, and there handed me
to the Governor, whose title is King's Lieutenant. He was a
Knight of the name of Barkley. He conducted me at once to a
large high tower of three stories, with a separate lock-up place in
each, one of a number of different towers contained within the
whole inclosure. He left me for the night in the lowest part,
and committed the custody of my person to a servant in whom
he placed great confidence. The servant brought a little straw at
once, and throwing it down on the ground, went away, fastening
the door of my prison, and securing the upper door both with a
great bolt and with iron bars. I recommended myself therefore
to God, Who is wont to go down with His people into the pit,
and Who never abandoned me in my bondage, as well as to the
most Blessed Virgin, the Mother of Mercy, and to my Patron
Saints and Guardian Angel; and after prayer I lay down with a
calm mind on the straw, and slept very well that night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The next day I examined the place, for there was some
light, though dim; and I found the name of Father Henry
Walpole, of blessed memory,<note place='foot'>Henry Walpole, S.J., was executed at York, April 7, 1595, for his
Priesthood.</note> cut with a knife on the wall, and
not far from there I found his oratory, which was a space where
there had been a narrow window, now blocked up with stones.
There he had written on either side with chalk the names of the
<pb n='xci'/><anchor id='Pgxci'/>
different choirs of Angels, and on the top, above the Cherubim
and Seraphim, the name of Mary Mother of God, and over that
the name of Jesus, and over that again, in Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, the name of GOD. It was truly a great consolation to
me to find myself in this place, hallowed by the presence of so
great and so devoted a martyr, the place, too, in which he was
frequently tortured, to the number, as I have heard, of fourteen
times. Probably they were unwilling to torture him in public and
in the ordinary place, because they did it oftener than they would
have it known. And I can well believe that he was racked that
number of times, for he lost through it the proper use of his
fingers. This I can vouch for from the following circumstance.
He was carried back to York, to be executed in the place where
he was taken on his first landing in England, and while in prison
there he had a discussion with some ministers which he wrote out
with his own hand.<note place='foot'>It was Father Walpole's custom to make notes of his conferences with
ministers. In the Public Record Office (<hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 248., n. 51)
there is an interesting record in his own hand of his discussions while he was
in the custody of Outlaw, the pursuivant.</note> A part of this writing was given to me,
together with some meditations on the Passion of Christ, which
he had written in prison before his own passion. These writings,
however, I could scarcely read at all, not because they were
written hastily, but because the hand of the writer could not
form the letters. It seemed more like the first attempts of a
child, than the handwriting of a scholar and a gentleman, such as
he was. Yet he used to be at Court before the death of Father
Campion, in whose honour he also wrote some beautiful verses
in the English tongue, declaring that he and many others had
received the warmth of life from that blessed martyr's blood,<note place='foot'>Edmund Campion, S.J., suffered at Tyburn, Dec. 1, 1581, for a pretended
conspiracy at Rome and Rhemes. The Act of 27 Elizabeth (1585),
which made the mere presence of a Priest in England high treason, had not
yet been passed.</note> and
had been animated by it to follow the more perfect counsels of
Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>When, therefore, I found myself in Father Walpole's cell I
rejoiced exceedingly thereat; but I was not worthy to be the
successor of such a man in his place of suffering. For on the
<pb n='xcii'/><anchor id='Pgxcii'/>
day following my gaoler, either because he thought to do me a
favour, or in consequence of his master's orders, brought me into
the upper room, which was sufficiently large and commodious for
a prisoner. I told him that I preferred to stay in the lower
dungeon, and mentioned the reason, but as he showed himself
opposed to this, I asked him to allow me sometimes to go there
and pray. This he promised me, and in fact frequently permitted.
Then he inquired of me if he could go for me anywhere to any
friends of mine who would be willing to send me a bed. For it
is the custom in this prison that a bed should not be provided,
but that a prisoner should provide himself a bed and other
furniture, which afterwards goes to the Lieutenant of the Tower,
even though the prisoner should be liberated. I replied that I
had no friends to whom I could send, except such as I left in the
prison from which I had been brought;<note place='foot'>This was said, of course, because it was dangerous to mention the names
of any friends who were still at liberty. It could do no harm to mention those
already in prison.</note> these, perhaps, if he
would call there, would give me a plain bed by way of alms. The
gaoler therefore went to the Catholics detained in the Clink, who
immediately sent me a bed such as they knew I wished for; that
is, a mattrass stuffed with wool and feathers after the Italian
fashion. They sent also a cloak and some linen for me; and
asked him always to come there for anything I wanted, and
promised to give money or anything else, provided he brought
a note signed by me of things I needed. They also gave him
money at that time for himself, and besought him to treat me
kindly.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XIV.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the third day, immediately after dinner, came my gaoler
to me, and with sorrowful mien told me the Lords Commissioners
had come, and with them the Queen's Attorney General, and that
I must go down to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I am ready,</q> I replied. <q>I only ask you to allow me to say
a <hi rend='italic'>Pater</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ave</hi> in the lower dungeon.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This he allowed; and then we went together to the house of
the Lieutenant, which was within the Tower walls. There I
<pb n='xciii'/><anchor id='Pgxciii'/>
found five men, none of whom had before examined me except
Wade, who was there for the purpose of accusing me on all
points.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Queen's Attorney General then took a sheet of paper,
and began to write a solemn form of juridical examination.</q>
</p>

<p>
The examination of Father Gerard on this occasion is preserved
in the Public Record Office.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 262, n. 123.</note> The Commissioners were
Sir Richard Barkley, Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Edward Coke,
then Attorney General, Thomas Fleming, a Privy Councillor,
Sir Francis Bacon, afterwards Lord Chancellor, and William
Wade, or Waad, afterwards Lieutenant of the Tower.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The examination of John Gerard, Priest, taken this 14th
day of April, 1597.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Being demanded whether he received any letters from
the parts beyond the seas or no, confesseth that within these
four or five days he received<note place='foot'>As he supposed. <hi rend='italic'>Erased.</hi></note> from Antwerp (as he supposeth)
letters inclosed and sealed up. But how many letters were
inclosed therein he knoweth not, and saith that the said letters
were directed to him by the name of Standish; and being
demanded from whom those letters were sent,<note place='foot'>Denieth that. <hi rend='italic'>Erased.</hi></note> saith that he
knoweth not from whom the same were sent, and denieth that
he read them or that he knoweth the contents of the same, and
at the first he said that he burnt them, but afterwards retracted
that and confesseth that he sent them over to whom the same
appertained, but<note place='foot'>Denieth that. <hi rend='italic'>Erased.</hi></note> refuseth to declare to whom the same were
delivered over, and refuseth also to declare who brought the
same to him, or by whom he conveyed them over. He confesseth
that he received within this year past other letters from
the parts beyond the seas, and two or three of them he confesseth
he did read, and saith that those letters contained matter concerning
maintenance of scholars beyond sea, but refuseth to
declare who sent those letters or by whom the same were
brought, and saith that some of those letters were sent from
St. Omers; and two or three other letters which he received
from the parts beyond the seas he conveyed over to some other
<pb n='xciv'/><anchor id='Pgxciv'/>
within this realm, but denieth that he knew the contents of
those letters, and refuseth to tell who sent or brought the same
or to whom the same were conveyed, but saith that the same
were sent over to him to whom the said last letters which he
received were conveyed unto. And being demanded whether
he sent not those letters to Garnett, his Superior, saith that he
will name no name; but saith that those letters came to him
because he had more opportunity to receive them and to convey
them over. And confesseth that the party to whom he sent
those letters is a Priest, and being demanded how it is possible
that he should know to whom the said last letters appertained,
considering that he saith that he neither knoweth from whom
the same were sent, nor knoweth the contents of the same,
especially the said letters being directed to himself by the name
of Standish, saith that he<note place='foot'>Thinketh that some <hi rend='italic'>substituted for</hi> knoweth who.</note> thinketh that some within this realm
have greater<note place='foot'>Care <hi rend='italic'>substituted for</hi> charge.</note> care and authority to provide for such scholars
as be beyond sea than he, and saith that he sent those last
letters as he had done other to that person, taking the same
to contain no other matter but only concerning<note place='foot'>Maintenance of, &amp;c, <hi rend='italic'>interlined</hi>.</note> maintenance
of scholars and such as be sent from hence for the like matters.
And being demanded whether he opened not the outermost
sealed of those last letters, confesseth that he did; and being
also demanded to whom the letters within inclosed were directed,
saith that he remembereth not<note place='foot'>The name ... person <hi rend='italic'>interlined in place of</hi> to whom.</note> the name, but saith that he
thinketh it was to the said former person, and saith that there
was nothing written within the outermost paper, and thinketh,
that there were two letters within that which he conveyed over.
And saith that the letters within were not directed as the outermost
was, but saith that he remembereth not<note place='foot'>By what name <hi rend='italic'>substituted for</hi> to whom.</note> by what name the
same were directed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>I refuse not for any disloyal mind, I protest as I look to be
saved, but for that I take these things not to have concerned any
matter of State, with which I would not have dealt, nor any other
but matters of devotion as before.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='xcv'/><anchor id='Pgxcv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And being demanded whether this subscription is his usual
manner of writing, saith that he useth the same in his subscriptions
to his examinations, and saith that the cause thereof is that he
would bring no man to trouble and that he will not acknowledge
his own hand, and saith that he never wrote any letter to any
man in this hand, saving once to Mr. Topcliffe. And being
demanded what was the cause that moved him to have escaped
out of prison of late, saith that the cause was that he might
have more opportunity to have won souls. And being demanded
who procured the counterfeit keys for him, by means whereof
he should have escaped, refuseth to tell who it was, for that, as
he saith, he will not discover anything against any other that
may bring them to trouble.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>John Gerard.</hi><note place='foot'>The spelling in those days was simply reckless. Father Gerard signs this
Examination <q>Jhon Gerrard;</q> it is endorsed <q>Jo. Jerrard;</q> and Sir Edward
Coke's note on it is <q>Jarrard.</q> It becomes difficult to know how to print
proper names; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Campion or Campian, Persons or Parsons, Garnet or
Garnett, Ouldcorne or Oldcorn. In the Narrative of the Gunpowder Plot the
form of name is adopted that is most prevalent in the autograph from which it
is printed.</note></q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Examined by us,</q></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ry. Barkeley.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Edw. Coke.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Tho. Fflemynge.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Fr. Bacon.</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='smallcaps'>W. Waad.</hi></q><note place='foot'><p>On the back of a playing card (the seven of spades), which is attached to
the original document, is written in Sir Edward Coke's handwriting:
</p>
<p>
<q>Polewhele  1<lb/>
Walpole     1<lb/>
PatCullen   1<lb/>
Annias     31<lb/>
Willms      1<lb/>
Squier<lb/>
Jarrard     1.</q>
</p>
<p>
Polewhele, Patrick Cullen or O'Collun, Williams, and Squire were all
executed for high treason, the latter on the accusation of having, at Father
Walpole's instigation, poisoned the pommel of Elizabeth's saddle. Annias
apostatized after two years' imprisonment.</p></note></l>
</lg>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
We now return to the impression that remained on Father
Gerard's memory of this examination, when he wrote his life
<pb n='xcvi'/><anchor id='Pgxcvi'/>
some twelve years afterwards. <q rend='pre'>They did not ask anything
at that time about private Catholics, but only about matters of
State, to which I answered as before in general terms; namely,
that all such things were strictly forbidden to us of the Society,
that I had consequently never mixed myself up with political
matters, sufficient proof whereof, I said, was to be found in the
fact that, though they had had me in custody for three years
and had constantly examined me, they had never been able to
produce a single line of my writing, nor a single trustworthy
witness, to show that I had ever injured the State in a single
point.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They then inquired what letters I had lately received from
our Fathers abroad. Here it was I first divined the reason of
my being transferred to the Tower. I answered, however, that
if I had ever received any letters from abroad, they never had
any connection with matters of State, but related solely to the
money matters of certain Catholics who were living beyond seas.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Did not you,</q> said Wade, <q>receive lately a packet of
letters; and did you not deliver them to such a one for Henry
Garnett?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>If I have received any such,</q> I answered, <q>and delivered
them as you say, I only did my duty. But I never received nor
delivered any but what related to the private money matters of
certain Religious or students who are pursuing their studies
beyond seas, as I have before said.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well,</q> said they, <q>where is he to be found to whom you
delivered the letters, and how is he called?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I do not know,</q> I answered; <q>and if I did know, I neither
could nor would tell you.</q> And then I alleged the usual reasons.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You tell us,</q> said the Attorney General, <q>that you do not
wish to offend against the State. Tell us, then, where this
Garnett is; for he is an enemy of the State, and you are bound
to give information of such people.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>He is no enemy of the State,</q> I replied; <q>but, on the
contrary, I am sure that he would be ready to lay down his
life for the Queen and the State. However, I do not know
where he is, and if I did know I would not tell you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But you shall tell us,</q> said they, <q>before we leave this place.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='xcvii'/><anchor id='Pgxcvii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Please God,</q> said I, <q>that shall never be.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They then produced the warrant which they had for putting
me to the torture, and gave it me to read; for it is not allowed
in this prison to put any one to the torture without express
warrant. I saw the document was duly signed, so I said: <q>By
the help of God, I will never do what is against God, against
justice, and against the Catholic faith. You have me in your
power; do what God permits you, for you certainly cannot go
beyond.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then they began to entreat me not to force them to do
what they were loath to do; and told me they were bound not
to desist from putting me to the torture day after day, as long
as my life lasted, until I gave the information they sought from
me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I trust in God's goodness,</q> I answered, <q>that He will never
allow me to do so base an act as to bring innocent persons to
harm. Nor, indeed, do I fear what you can do to me, since all
of us are in God's hands.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Such was the purport of my replies, as far as I can remember.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then we proceeded to the place appointed for the torture.
We went in a sort of solemn procession; the attendants preceding
us with lighted candles, because the place was underground and
very dark, especially about the entrance. It was a place of
immense extent, and in it were ranged divers sorts of racks, and
other instruments of torture. Some of these they displayed before
me, and told me I should have to taste them every one. Then
again they asked me if I was willing to satisfy them on the points
on which they had questioned me. <q>It is out of my power to
satisfy you,</q> I answered; and throwing myself on my knees, I
said a prayer or two.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then they led me to a great upright beam, or pillar of wood,
which was one of the supports of this vast crypt. At the summit
of this column were fixed certain iron staples for supporting
weights. Here they placed on my wrists manacles of iron, and
ordered me to mount upon two or three wicker steps;<note place='foot'>Scirpicula quaedam duo vel tria ex juncis facta (MS.). It is not easy to
understand exactly what these were.</note> then
raising my arms, they inserted an iron bar through the rings of
<pb n='xcviii'/><anchor id='Pgxcviii'/>
the manacles, and then through the staples in the pillar, putting a
pin through the bar so that it could not slip. My arms being thus
fixed above my head, they withdrew those wicker steps I spoke
of, one by one, from beneath my feet, so that I hung by my
hands and arms. The tips of my toes, however, still touched the
ground;<note place='foot'>Father Gerard's great stature could not be more clearly indicated. This
would of course involve a greater weight of body, and consequently greater
severity in this mode of torture. <q>Erat enim,</q> says Father More, in his
History, <q>pleno et procero corpore.</q></note> so they dug away the ground beneath, as they could
not raise me higher, for they had suspended me from the
topmost staples in the pillar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus hanging by my wrists, I began to pray, while those
gentlemen standing round asked me again if I was willing to
confess. I replied, <q>I neither can nor will.</q> But so terrible a
pain began to oppress me, that I was scarce able to speak the
words. The worst pain was in my breast and belly, my arms and
hands. It seemed to me that all the blood in my body rushed
up my arms into my hands; and I was under the impression at
the time that the blood actually burst forth from my fingers and
at the back of my hands. This was, however, a mistake; the
sensation was caused by the swelling of the flesh over the iron
that bound it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I felt now such intense pain (and the effect was probably
heightened by an interior temptation), that it seemed to me
impossible to continue enduring it. It did not, however, go so
far as to make me feel any inclination or real disposition to give
the information they wanted. For as the eyes of our merciful
Lord had seen my imperfection, He did <q>not suffer me to be
tempted above what I was able, but with the temptation made
also a way of escape.</q> Seeing me therefore in this agony of pain
and this interior distress, His infinite mercy sent me this thought:
<q>The very furthest and utmost they can do is to take away thy
life; and often hast thou desired to give thy life for God: thou
art in God's hands, Who knoweth well what thou sufferest, and
is all-powerful to sustain thee.</q> With this thought our good God
gave me also out of His immense bounty the grace to resign
myself, and offer myself utterly to His good pleasure, together
<pb n='ic'/><anchor id='Pgic'/>
with some hope and desire of dying for His sake. From that
moment I felt no more trouble in my soul, and even the bodily
pain seemed to be more bearable than before, although I doubt
not that it really increased, from the continued strain that was
exercised on every part of my body.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hereupon those gentlemen, seeing that I gave them no
further answer, departed to the Lieutenant's house; and there they
waited, sending now and then to know how things were going on
in the crypt. There were left with me three or four strong men,
to superintend my torture. My gaoler also remained, I fully
believe out of kindness to me, and kept wiping away with a
handkerchief the sweat that ran down from my face the whole
time, as, indeed, it did from my whole body. So far, indeed, he
did me a service; but by his words, he rather added to my
distress, for he never stopped beseeching and entreating me to
have pity on myself, and tell these gentlemen what they wanted
to know; and so many human reasons did he allege, that I verily
believe he was either instigated directly by the devil under
pretence of affection for me, or had been left there purposely by
the persecutors to influence me by his show of sympathy. In any
case, these shafts of the enemy seemed to be spent before they
reached me, for though annoying, they did me no real hurt, nor
did they seem to touch my soul, or move it in the least. I said,
therefore, to him, <q>I pray, you to say no more on that point, for I
am not minded to lose my soul for the sake of my body, and you
pain me by what you say.</q> Yet I could not prevail with him to
be silent. The others also who stood by said: <q>He will be a
cripple all his life, if he lives through it; but he will have to
be tortured daily till he confesses.</q> But I kept praying in a
low voice, and continually uttered the holy names of Jesus
and Mary.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I had hung in this way till after one of the clock, as I think,
when I fainted. How long I was in the faint I know not;
perhaps not long; for the men who stood by lifted me up, or
replaced those wicker steps under my feet, until I came to
myself; and immediately they heard me praying, they let me
down again. This they did over and over again when the faint
came on, eight or nine times before five of the clock. Somewhat
<pb n='c'/><anchor id='Pgc'/>
before five came Wade again, and drawing near said, <q>Will you
yet obey the commands of the Queen and the Council?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No,</q> said I, <q>what you ask is unlawful, therefore I will
never do it.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>At least then,</q> said Wade, <q>say that you would like to speak
to Secretary Cecil.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I have nothing to say to him,</q> I replied, <q>more than I have
said already; and if I were to ask to speak to him, scandal would
be caused, for people would imagine that I was yielding at
length, and wished to give information.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Upon this Wade suddenly turned his back in a rage, and
departed, saying in a loud and angry tone, <q>Hang there, then, till
you rot!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So he went away, and I think all the Commissioners then
left the Tower; for at five of the clock the great bell of the
Tower sounds, as a signal for all to leave who do not wish to be
locked in all night. Soon after this they took me down from my
cross, and though neither foot nor leg was injured, yet I could
hardly stand.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XV.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I was helped back to my cell by the gaoler, and meeting on the
way some of the prisoners who had the range of the Tower, I
addressed the gaoler in their hearing, saying I wondered how
those gentlemen could insist so on my telling them where Father
Garnett was, since every one must acknowledge it to be a sin to
betray an innocent man, a thing I would never do, though I
should die for it. This I said out loud, on purpose that the
authorities might not have it in their power to publish a report
about me that I had made a confession, as they often did in such
cases. I had also another reason, which was that word might
reach Father Garnett, through these persons spreading abroad
what they heard me say, that it was about him I was chiefly
examined, in order that he might look to himself. I noticed that
my gaoler was very unwilling that I should speak thus before the
others, but I did not stint for that. My gaoler appeared sincerely
to compassionate my state, and when he reached my cell he laid
me a fire, and brought me some food, as supper-time had nearly
<pb n='ci'/><anchor id='Pgci'/>
come. I scarcely tasted anything, but laid myself on my bed,
and remained quiet there till the next morning.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Early next morning, however, soon after the Tower gates
were opened, my gaoler came up to the cell and told me that
Master Wade had arrived, and that I must go down to him.
I went down, therefore, that time in a sort of cloak with wide
sleeves, for my hands were so swollen that they would not have
passed through ordinary sleeves. When I had come to the
Lieutenant's house, Wade addressed me thus: <q>I am sent to
you on the part of the Queen and of Master Secretary Cecil, the
first of whom assures you on the word of a Sovereign, the other
on his word of honour, that they know for certain that Garnett is
in the habit of meddling in political matters, and that he is an
enemy of the State. Consequently, unless you mean to contradict
them flatly, you ought to submit your judgment, and
produce him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>They cannot possibly know this,</q> I replied, <q>by their own
experience and of certain knowledge, since they have no personal
knowledge of the man. Now, I have lived with him and know
him well, and I know him to be no such character as you say.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well then,</q> returned he, <q>you will not acknowledge it, nor
tell us what we ask?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No, certainly not,</q> said I; <q>I neither can nor will.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>It would be better for you if you did,</q> he replied. And
thereupon he summoned from the next room a gentleman who
had been there waiting, a tall and commanding figure, whom he
called the Superintendent of Torture. I knew there was such an
officer, but this man was not really in that charge, as I heard
afterwards, but was Master of the Artillery in the Tower. However,
Wade called him by that name to strike the greater terror
into me, and said to him, <q>In the name of the Queen, and of
the Lords of her Council, I deliver this man into your hands.
You are to rack him twice to-day, and twice daily until such time
as he chooses to confess.</q> The officer then took charge of me,
and Wade departed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thereupon we descended with the same solemnity as before
into the place appointed for torture, and again they put the
manacles on the same part of my arms as before; indeed, they
<pb n='cii'/><anchor id='Pgcii'/>
could not be put on in any other part, for the flesh had so risen
on both sides that there were two hills of flesh with a valley
between, and the manacles would not meet anywhere but in the
valley. Here then were they put on, not without causing me
much pain. Our good Lord, however, helped me, and I cheerfully
offered Him my hands and my heart. So I was hung up again
as I before described; and in my hands I felt a great deal more
pain than on the previous day, but not so much in my breast and
belly, perhaps because this day I had eaten nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While thus hanging I prayed, sometimes silently, sometimes
aloud, recommending myself to our Lord Jesus and His Blessed
Mother. I hung much longer this time without fainting, but at
length I fainted so thoroughly that they could not bring me to,
and they thought that I either was dead or soon would be. So
they called the Lieutenant, but how long he was there I know
not, nor how long I remained in the faint. When I came round,
however, I found myself no longer hanging by my hands, but
supported sitting on a bench, with many people round me,
who had opened my teeth with some iron instrument, and
were pouring warm water down my throat. Now when the
Lieutenant saw I could speak, he said: <q>Do you not see how
much better it is for you to yield to the wishes of the Queen than
to lose your life this way?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>By God's help I answered him with more spirit than I had
ever before felt, <q>No, certainly I do not see it. I would rather
die a thousand times than do what they require of me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You will not, then,</q> he repeated.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No, indeed I will not,</q> I answered, <q>while a breath remains
in my body.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well then,</q> said he, and he seemed to say it sorrowfully, as
if reluctant to carry out his orders, <q>we must hang you up again
now, and after dinner too.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Let us go, then, in the name of God,</q> I said; <q>I have but
one life, and if I had more I would offer them all for this cause.</q>
And with this I attempted to rise in order to go to the pillar, but
they were obliged to support me, as I was very weak in body
from the torture. And if there was any strength in my soul it was
the gift of God, and given, I am convinced, because I was a
<pb n='ciii'/><anchor id='Pgciii'/>
member of the Society, though a most unworthy one. I was
suspended, therefore, a third time, and hung there in very great
pain of body, but not without great consolation of soul, which
seemed to me to arise from the prospect of dying. Whether it
was from a true love of suffering for Christ, or from a sort of
selfish desire to be with Christ, God knows best; but I certainly
thought that I should die, and felt great joy in committing myself
to the will and good pleasure of my God, and contemning entirely
the will of men. Oh, that God would grant me always to have
that same spirit (though I doubt not that it wanted much of true
perfection in His eyes), for a longer life remains to me than I
then thought, and He granted me time to prepare myself better
for His holy presence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After awhile the Lieutenant, seeing that he made no way
with me by continuing the torture, or because the dinner-hour
was near at hand, or perhaps through a natural feeling of compassion,
ordered me to be taken down. I think I hung not
quite an hour this third time. I am rather inclined to think that
the Lieutenant released me from compassion; for, some time
after my escape, a gentleman of quality told me he had it from
Sir Richard Barkley himself (who was this very Lieutenant of
whom I speak), that he had of his own accord resigned the office
he held, because he would no longer be an instrument in torturing
innocent men so cruelly. And, in fact, he gave up the post after
holding it but three or four months, and another Knight was
appointed in his stead, in whose time it was that I made my
escape.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So I was brought back to my room by my gaoler, who
seemed to have his eyes full of tears, and he assured me that his
wife had been weeping and praying for me the whole time,
though I had never seen the good woman in all my life. Then
he brought me some food, of which I could eat but little, and
that little he was obliged to cut for me and put into my mouth.
I could not hold a knife in my hands for many days after, much
less now when I was not even able to move my fingers, nor help
myself in anything, so that he was obliged to do everything for
me. However, by order of the authorities he took away my
knife, scissors, and razors, lest I should kill myself, I believe;
<pb n='civ'/><anchor id='Pgciv'/>
for they always do this in the Tower as long as the prisoner is
under warrant for torture. I expected, therefore, daily to be sent
for again to the torture-chamber, according to order; but our
merciful God, while to other stronger champions, such as Father
Walpole and Father Southwell, He gave a sharp struggle that
they might overcome, gave His weak soldier but a short trial that
he might not be overcome. They indeed, being perfected in a
short time, fulfilled a long space; but I, unworthy of so great a
good, was left to run out my days, and so supply for my defects
by washing my soul with my tears, since I deserved not to wash
it with my blood. God so ordained it, and may that be done
which is good in His eyes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Father Garnett, in his letters, mentions Father Gerard's torture
for the first time when writing to Father Persons at Rome, April
23, 1597:<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 547.</note> <q>John Gerard hath been sore tortured in the Tower:
it is thought it was for some letters directed to him out of Spain.</q>
Between this date and the next, some details had reached Father
Garnett, for on the 7th of May, 1597, he wrote to the General
(we translate from the Italian):<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. ii., n. 27; P., vol. ii., f. 604.</note> <q>Of John Gerard I have already
written to you where he is. He hath been twice hanged up by
the hands, with great cruelty of others, and not less suffering of
his own. The inquisitors here say that he is very obstinate, and
that he has a great alliance with God or the devil, as they cannot
draw the least word out of his mouth, except that in torment he
cries <q>Jesus.</q> They took him lately to the rack, and the torturers
and examiners were there ready, but he suddenly, when he entered
the place, knelt down, and with a loud voice prayed to our Lord
that, as He had given grace and strength to some of His Saints
to bear with Christian patience being torn to pieces by horses
for His love, so He would be pleased to give him grace and
courage, rather to be dragged into a thousand pieces than to say
anything that might injure any person or the Divine glory. And
so they left him without tormenting him, seeing him so resolved.</q>
On June 13, 1597 (in the copy it is <hi rend='italic'>Jan. 10</hi>, evidently a mistake),
he writes:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 548.</note> <q>I wrote unto you heretofore of the remove of Mr.
<pb n='cv'/><anchor id='Pgcv'/>
Gerard to the Tower: he hath been thrice hanged up by the
hands, every time until he was almost dead, and that in one day
twice. The cause was (as now I understand perfectly) for to tell
where his Superior was, and by whom he had sent him letters
which were delivered him from Father Persons, and he was
discovered by one of his fellow-prisoners. The Earl of Essex
saith he must needs honour him for his constancy.</q> Again, a
letter of Father Garnett to the General, in Latin, dated June 11,
1597, runs thus:<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 601.</note> <q>I have written to you more than once of our
Mr. John Gerard, that he has been thrice tortured, but that he
has borne all with invincible courage. We have also lately heard
for certain that the Earl of Essex praised his constancy, declaring
that he could not help honouring and admiring the man. A
secretary of the Royal Council denies that the Queen wishes to
have him executed. To John this will be a great trouble.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XVI.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I remained therefore in my cell, spending my time principally
in prayer. And now again I made the Spiritual Exercises, as I
had done at the beginning of my imprisonment, giving four or
five hours a day to meditation for a whole month. I had a
breviary with me, so that I was able to say my Office; and
every day I said a dry Mass (such as is said by those who are
practising Mass before the Priesthood), and that with great
reverence and desire of communicating, especially at that part
where I should have communicated if the Sacrifice had been real.
And these practices consoled me in my tribulation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At the end of three weeks, as far as I can remember, I was
able to move my fingers, and help myself a little, and even hold
a knife. So when I had finished my retreat, I asked leave to have
some books, but they only allowed me a Bible, which I obtained
from my friends in my former prison. I sent to them for some
money, by which means I saw that I should be able to enlist the
sympathies of my gaoler, and induce him to allow me things, and
even to bring me some books. My friends sent me by him all
that I asked for. I got my gaoler to buy some large oranges, a
fruit of which he was very fond. But besides gratifying him
<pb n='cvi'/><anchor id='Pgcvi'/>
with a present of them, I meditated making another use of them
in time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I now began to exercise my hands a little after dinner.
Supper I never took, though it was always allowed; indeed, there
was no stint of food in the prison, all being furnished at the
Queen's expense; for there were given me daily six small rolls of
very good bread. There are different scales of diet fixed in the
prison, according to the rank of the prisoner; the religious state,
indeed, they take no account of, but only human rank, thus
making most of what ought to be esteemed the least. Well, the
exercise which I gave my hands was to cut the peel of these
oranges into the form of crosses, and sew them two and two
together. I made many of these crosses, and many rosaries also
strung on silken cord. Then I asked my gaoler if he would
carry some of these crosses and rosaries to my friends in my old
prison? He, seeing nothing in this to compromise him, readily
undertook to do so. In the meanwhile, I put some of the
orange-juice in a small jug. I was now in want of a pen, but I
dared not openly ask for one; nay, even if I had asked, and
obtained my request, I could at this time scarcely have written,
or but very badly; for though I could hold a pen, I could
hardly feel that I had anything in my fingers. The sense of
touch was not recovered for five months, and even then not fully,
for I was never without a certain numbness in my hands up to
the time of my escape, which was more than six months after the
torture. So I begged for a quill to make myself a toothpick,
which he readily brought me. I made this into a pen fit for
writing, then cutting off a short piece of the pointed end, I fixed
it on a small stick. With the rest of the quill I made a toothpick,
so long that nothing appeared to have been cut off, and this
I afterwards showed my gaoler. Then I begged for some paper
to wrap up my rosaries and crosses, and obtained his leave also
to write a line or two with pencil on the paper, asking my friends
to pray for me. All this he allowed, not suspecting that he was
carrying anything but what he knew. But I had managed to write
on the paper with some orange-juice, telling my friends to write
back to me in the same way, but sparingly at first; asking them
also to give the bearer a little money, and promise him some as
<pb n='cvii'/><anchor id='Pgcvii'/>
often as he should bring any crosses or rosaries from me, with a
few words of my writing to assure them that I was well.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When they received the paper and the rosaries, knowing
that I should if possible have written something with orange-juice,
as I used to do with them, they immediately retired to
their room, and held the paper to a fire. Thus they read all I
had written, and wrote back to me in the same way, sending me
some comfits or dried sweetmeats wrapped up in the paper on
which they had written. We continued this method of communication
for about half a year; but we soon proceeded with much
greater confidence when we found that the man never failed to
deliver our missives faithfully. For full three months, however, he
had no idea that he was conveying letters to and fro. But after
three months I began to ask him to allow me to write with a
pencil at greater length, which he permitted. I always gave him
these letters open, that he might see what I wrote, and I wrote
nothing but spiritual matters that he could see, but on the blank
part of the paper I had written with orange-juice directions
and particular advice for my different friends, about which he
knew nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As it happened, indeed, I need not have been so circumspect;
for the man, as I found out after some time, could not
read. He pretended, however, that he was able, and used to
stand and look over my shoulder while I read to him what I had
written with pencil. At length it occurred to me that possibly he
could not read; so in order to make the trial, while he was
looking over the paper, I read it altogether in a different way
from what I had written. After doing this on two or three
occasions without his taking any notice, I said openly to him,
with a smile, that he need not look over my shoulder any more.
He acknowledged, indeed, that he could not read, but said that he
took great pleasure in hearing what I read to him. After this he
let me write what I would, and carried everything as faithfully as
ever. He even provided me with ink, and carried closed letters
to and fro between my friends and me. For seeing that I had to
do with very few, and those discreet and trustworthy people, and
thinking that neither I nor they were likely to betray him, he did
just what we asked him for a consideration, for he always
<pb n='cviii'/><anchor id='Pgcviii'/>
received a stipulated payment. He begged me, however, not to
require him to go so often to the Clink prison, lest suspicion
should arise from these frequent visits, which might cause harm
not only to him, but to me; he proposed, therefore, that some
friend of mine should meet him near the Tower and deliver the
letters to him. But I was loath to risk the safety of any one by
putting him thus in the man's power. It made no difference to
those already in custody; they could, without much additional
danger, hold correspondence with me, and send me anything for
my support by way of alms. Besides, I knew that my messenger
would not be likely to speak of the letter he carried, as he was
quite conscious that this would be as dangerous for himself as
for those to whom he carried them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Nay, even if he had wished he could not have done much
injury either to me or my friends, because I took good care never
to name any of them in my letters: but before I was in prison,
and after, I invariably used pseudonyms which were understood
by those to whom I wrote. Thus, I called one <q>Brother,</q> another
<q>Son,</q> another <q>Nephew,</q> or <q>Friend,</q> and so of their wives,
calling this one <q>Sister,</q> that one <q>Niece,</q> or <q>Daughter.</q> In
this way no one not in the secret could possibly tell whom I
meant, even if the letters had been intercepted, which they never
were. I may add that even if the letters had been betrayed and
read, they could never have been made further use of by the
enemy, in allowing them to be carried to their destination to lure
the correspondents on till they should compromise themselves, as
was sometimes done. For I never wrote now with lemon-juice,
as I once did in the Clink; which letter was betrayed to the
persecutor Wade, as I before related. The reason of my doing
so then was because there were two letters there, which had
to be read in one place, and then carried to another. Now
lemon-juice has this property, that what is written in it can be
read in water quite as well as by fire, and when the paper is
dried the writing disappears again till it is steeped afresh, or
again held to the fire. But anything written with orange-juice is
at once washed out by water, and cannot be read at all in that
way; and if held to the fire, though the characters are thus made
to appear, and can be read, they will not disappear; so that a
<pb n='cix'/><anchor id='Pgcix'/>
letter of this sort, once read, can never be delivered to any one
as if it had not been read. The party will see at once that it has
been read, and will certainly refuse and disown it, if it should
contain anything dangerous. It was in this way I knew that my
letters always reached my friends, and that theirs reached me in
safety. And so our correspondence continued, I obtaining sure
information of all my friends, and they receiving at my hands the
consolation they sought.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In order, however, that matters might go on still more
securely, I managed, through some of my friends, that John Lilly's
release should be purchased; and from that time I always got
him to bring to my gaoler everything that reached me from the
outside. It was through his means too, a little later, that I
escaped from the Tower, although nothing certainly was farther
from my thoughts when I thus secured his services. All I had in
view was to be able to increase my correspondence with safety.
This went on for about four months, and after the first month I
gave a good time to study by means of books secretly procured.
But at this time an event occurred which caused me great
anxiety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Master Francis Page, of whom I have before spoken, was
now living with my former host,</q> Mr. Wiseman, <q rend='pre'>who had
been released from prison. After my removal to the Tower,
he got to learn in what part of it I was confined; and out
of regard for me used to come daily to a spot from whence
he could see my window, in order to get the chance some
day of seeing me there. At last it so happened that going
one day to the window (it was a warm day in summer), I
noticed a gentleman at some distance pull off his hat as if
to me; then he walked to and fro, and frequently stopped and
made pretence of arranging his hair, in order to have the opportunity
of doffing his hat to me without attracting the attention of
others. At last I recognized him by the clothes that he was
accustomed to wear, and made him a sign of recognition, and
giving him my blessing, I withdrew at once from the window,
lest others should see me, and have suspicion of him. But the
good man was not content with this; daily did he come for my
blessing, and stopped some time, walking to and fro, and ever as
<pb n='cx'/><anchor id='Pgcx'/>
he turned he doffed his hat, though I frequently made signals to
him not to do so. At length he was noticed doing this, and one
day as I was looking I saw him, to my great grief, seized and led
away. He was brought to the Lieutenant of the Tower, who
examined him about me and my friends. But he denied everything,
and said that he simply walked there for his amusement, it
being a fine open space close to the river Thames. So they
kept him a prisoner for some days, and meanwhile by inquiry
found that he was living with my former host. This increased
their suspicion that he had been sent there to give me some sign.
But as he constantly denied everything, they at last had recourse
to me, and sent for me to be examined. Now, as I was going
to the examination, Master Page was walking up and down with
my gaoler in the hall, through which I was taken to the chamber
where the authorities awaited me. Immediately I was introduced,
the examiners said to me: <q>There is a young man here named
Francis Page, who says he knows you and desires to speak with
you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>He can do so if he wishes,</q> I replied; <q>but who is this
Francis Page? I know no such person.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Not know him?</q> said they; <q>he at any rate knows you so
well that he can recognize you at a distance, and has come daily
to salute you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I, however, maintained I knew no such man. So when they
found they could twist nothing out of me either by wiles or
threats, they sent me back. But as I passed again through the
hall where Master Page was with the others, I looked all round,
and said with a loud voice, <q>Is there any one here of the name
of Francis Page, who says he knows me well, and has often
come before my window to see me? Which of all these is he?
I know no such person, and I wonder that any one should be
willing to injure himself by saying such things.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>All this while the gaoler was trying to prevent my speaking,
but was unable. I said this, not because I had any idea that he
had acknowledged that he knew me, but for fear they might
afterwards tell him of me what they had told me of him. And so
it turned out. For they had told him already that I had acknowledged
I knew him, and they had only sent for me then that he
<pb n='cxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxi'/>
might see me go in, intending to tell him I had confirmed all I
said before. But now they could not so impose on him. For
when he was summoned, he immediately told them what I had
said publicly in the hall as I passed through. The men, in their
disappointment, stormed against the gaoler and me, but being
thus baffled, could not carry out their deception.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A little later they released Master Page for money, who
soon crossed the sea, and, after going through his studies in
Belgium, was made Priest. Thence he returned afterwards to
England and remained mostly in London, where he was much
beloved, and useful to many souls. One of his penitents was
that Mistress Line whose martyrdom I have above related. In
her house he was once taken, as I said, but that time he escaped.
A little after he obtained his desire of being admitted into the
Society, but before he could be sent over to Belgium for his
noviceship, he was again taken, and being tried like gold in the
furnace, and accepted as the victim of a holocaust, he washed his
robe in the blood of the Lamb, and is now in the possession of
his reward. And he sees me now no longer detained in the
Tower while he is walking by the water of the Thames, but
rather he beholds me on the waters, still tossed by the various
winds and storms, while he is secure of his own eternal happiness,
and solicitous, as I hope, for mine. Before all this, however, he
used to say that he was much encouraged and amused by
hearing what I said as I passed through the hall, as it enabled
him to detect and avoid the snares of the enemy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>During the time I was detained at the Tower, no one was
allowed to visit me, so that I could afford no help to souls by my
words; by letter, however, I did what I could with those to
whom I could venture to trust the secret of how they might
correspond with me. Once, however, after John Lilly's release, as
he was walking in London streets, two ladies, mother and
daughter, accosted him, and begged him if it was by any means
possible to bring them where they could see me. He, knowing
the extreme danger of such an attempt, endeavoured to dissuade
them, but they gave him no peace till he promised to open the
matter to the gaoler, and try to get him to admit them, as if they
were relations of his. Gained over by large promises, the man
<pb n='cxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxii'/>
consented; the ladies had also made a present of a new gown to
his wife. They therefore, dressing themselves as simple London
citizens, the fashion of whose garments is very different from that
of ladies of quality, came with John Lilly under pretence of
visiting the gaoler's wife, and seeing the lions that are kept in the
Tower, and the other animals there which the curious are in the
habit of coming to see. After they had seen all the sights, the
gaoler led them within the walls of the Tower, and when he
found a good opportunity, introduced them and John Lilly into
my room, exposing himself to a great danger for a small gain.
When they saw me they could not restrain themselves from running
and kissing my feet, and even strove with one another who should
first kiss them. For my part, I could not deny them what they
had bought so dear, and then begged for so earnestly, but I only
allowed them to offer this homage to me as to the prisoner of
Christ, not as to the sinner that I am. We conversed a little, then
leaving with me what they had brought for my use, they returned
in safety much consoled, but not without tears, for they thought
they should never see my face again, inasmuch as they had heard
in the city that I was to be brought to trial and executed.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XVII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Once also Father Garnett, my Superior, sent me similar happy
news, warning me in a letter full of consolation to prepare myself
for death. And, indeed, I cannot deny that I rejoiced at the
things that were said to me; but my great unworthiness prevented
me from going into the House of the Lord. In fact, the good
Father, though he knew it not, was to obtain this mercy before
me; and God grant that I may be able to follow him even at a
distance to the Cross which he so much loved and honoured.
God gave him the desire of his heart; for it was on the Feast
of the Invention of the Holy Cross that he found Him Whom
his soul loved. On this same Feast of the Holy Cross on
which this holy Father found his crown, I received, by his
intercession I fully believe, two great favours, of which I will
speak further at the close of this narration; to which close,
indeed, it behoves me to hasten, for I am conscious that I have
already been more diffuse than such small matters warranted.</q>
</p>

<pb n='cxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxiii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What good Father Garnett warned me of by letter, the enemy
threatened also by words and acts about that time. For those
who had come before with authority to put me to the torture, now
came again, but with another object, to wit, to take my formal
examination in preparation for my trial. So the Queen's Attorney
General questioned me on all points, and wrote everything down
in that order which he meant to observe in prosecuting me at
the assizes, as he told me. He asked me, therefore, about my
Priesthood, and about my coming to England as a Priest and
a Jesuit, and inquired whether I had dealt with any to reconcile
them to the Pope, and draw them away from the faith and
religious profession which was approved in England. All these
things I freely confessed that I had done; answers which
furnished quite sufficient matter for my condemnation according
to their laws. When they asked, however, with whom I had
communicated in political matters, I replied that I had never
meddled with such things. But they urged the point, and said
it was impossible that I, who so much desired the conversion
of England, should not have tried these means also, as being
very well adapted to the end. To this I replied, as far as I
recollect, in the following way: <q>I will tell you my mind candidly
in this matter, and about the State, in order that you may have
no doubt about my intent, nor question me any more on the
subject; and in what I say, lo! before God and His holy Angels
I lie not, nor do I add aught to the true feeling of my heart.
I wish, indeed, that the whole of England should be converted
to the Catholic and Roman faith; that the Queen, too, should
be converted, and all the Privy Council; yourselves also, and
all the magistrates of the realm: but so that the Queen and
you all without a single exception should continue to hold
the same powers and dignities that you do at present, and
that not a single hair of your head should perish, that so
you may be happy both in this life and the next. Do not
think, however, that I desire this conversion for my own sake,
in order to regain my liberty and follow my vocation in freedom.
No; I call God to witness that I would gladly consent to be
hanged to-morrow if all this could be brought about by that
means. This is my mind and my desire: consequently I
<pb n='cxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxiv'/>
am no enemy of the Queen's nor of yours, nor have I ever
been so.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hereupon Mr. Attorney kept silence for a time, and then
he began afresh to ask me what Catholics I knew; did I know
such-and-such? I answered, <q>I do not know them.</q> And I
added the usual reasons why I should still make the same
answer even if I did know them. Upon this, he digressed to
the question of equivocation, and began to inveigh against Father
Southwell,</q> whose conduct I defended by several arguments.<note place='foot'>These arguments are purposely omitted in this place, and they are
reserved for insertion later, when we propose to examine into the morality
of the answers made by Father Gerard and others in their judicial interrogations.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They made no reply to me; but the Attorney General
wrote everything down, and said he should use it against me
at my trial in a short time. But he did not keep his word:
for I was not worthy to enter under God's roof, where nothing
denied can enter. I have, therefore, still to be purified by a
prolonged sojourn in exile, and so at length, if God please, be
saved as by fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This my last examination was in Trinity term, as they
call it. They have four terms in the year, during which many
come up to London to have their causes tried, for these are
times that the law courts are open. It is during these terms,
on account of the great confluence of people, that they bring
those Priests to trial whom they have determined to prosecute;
and probably this was what they proposed to do in my case:
but man proposes and God disposes, and He had disposed
otherwise. When this time, therefore, had passed away, there was
no longer any probability that they would proceed against me
publicly. I turned my attention consequently to study in this
time of enforced leisure, as I thought they had now determined
only to prevent my communication with others, and that this
was the reason they had transferred me to my present prison, as
being more strict and more secure.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='cxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxv'/>

<div>
<head>XVIII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I thus endeavoured to conform myself to the decrees of God
and the tyranny of man; when lo! on the last day of July [1597],
the anniversary of our holy Father Ignatius' departure from this
life, while I was in meditation and was entertaining a vehement
desire of an opportunity for saying Mass, it came into my head
that this really might be accomplished in the cell of a certain
Catholic gentleman, which lay opposite mine on the other side
of a small garden within the Tower. This gentleman<note place='foot'>We find from an extract of one of Father Garnett's letters in the
Stonyhurst MSS. that this gentleman's name was Arden. <q>Oct. 8, 1597.
Upon St. Francis' day at night broke out of the Tower one Arden and
Mr. Gerard the Jesuit. There is yet no inquiry after him</q> (<hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii.,
f. 548). Father Bartoli, also, and Father More mention Arden as the name of
Father Gerard's companion. Francis Arden was committed to the Tower,
Feb. 22, 1584. He was probably a relation of Edward Arden, who was
hanged Dec. 23, 1583, <q>protesting his innocence of every charge, and
declaring that his only crime was the profession of the Catholic religion</q>
(Rishton's <hi rend='italic'>Diary in the Tower</hi>).</note> had been
detained ten years in prison. He had been, indeed, condemned
to death, but the sentence was not carried out. He was in the
habit of going up daily on the leads of the building in which
he was confined, which he was allowed to use as a place of
exercise. Here he would salute me, and wait for my blessing
on bended knees.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On examining this idea of mine more at leisure, I concluded
that the matter was feasible, if I could prevail on my gaoler to
allow me to visit this gentleman. For he had a wife who had
obtained permission to visit him at fixed times, and bring him
changes of linen and other little comforts in a basket; and as
this had now gone on many years, the officers had come to be
not so particular in examining the basket as they were at first.
I hoped, therefore, that there would be a possibility of introducing
gradually by means of this lady all things necessary for
the celebration of Mass, which my friends would supply. Resolving
to make the trial, I made a sign to the gentleman to attend
to what I was going to indicate to him. I then took pen and
paper and made as if I was writing somewhat; then, after holding
the paper to the fire, I made a show of reading it, and lastly I
<pb n='cxvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxvi'/>
wrapped up one of my crosses in it, and made a sign of sending
it over to him. I dared not speak to him across the garden, as
what I said would easily have been heard by others. Then I
began treating with my gaoler to convey a cross or a rosary for
me to my fellow-prisoner, for the same man had charge of both
of us, as we were near neighbours. At first he refused, saying
that he durst not venture, as he had had no proof of the other
prisoner's fidelity in keeping a secret. <q>For if,</q> said he, <q>the
gentleman's wife were to talk of this, and it should become
known I had done such a thing, it would be all over with me.</q>
I reassured him, however, and convinced him that such a result
was not likely, and, as I added a little bribe, I prevailed upon
him as usual to gratify me. He took my letter, and the other
received what I sent; but he wrote me nothing back as I had
requested him to do. Next morning when he made his appearance
on the leads he thanked me by signs, and showed the
cross I had sent him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After three days, as I got no answer from him, I began to
suspect the real reason, namely, that he had not read my letter.
So I called his attention again, and went through the whole
process in greater detail. Thus, I took an orange and squeezed
the juice into a little cup, then I took a pen and wrote with the
orange-juice, and holding the paper some time before the fire,
that the writing might be visible, I perused it before him, trying
to make him understand that this was what he should do with
my next paper. This time he fathomed my meaning, and thus
read the next letter I sent him. He soon sent me a reply,
saying that he thought the first time I wanted him to burn the
paper, as I had written a few visible words on it with pencil;
therefore he had done so. To my proposal, moreover, he
answered, that the thing could be done, if my gaoler would
allow me to visit him in the evening and remain with him the
next day; and that his wife would bring all the furniture that
should be given her for the purpose.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>As a next step, I sounded the gaoler about allowing me to
visit my fellow-prisoner, and proposed he should let me go just
once and dine with him, and that he, the gaoler, should have
his share in the feast. He refused absolutely, and showed great
<pb n='cxvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxvii'/>
fear of the possibility of my being seen as I crossed the garden,
or lest the Lieutenant might take it into his head to pay me a
visit that very day. But as he was never in the habit of visiting
me, I argued that it was very improbable that the thing should
happen as he feared. After this, the golden arguments I
adduced proved completely successful, for I promised him
a crown for his kindness; and he acceded to my request.
So I fixed on the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin; and in the
meanwhile I told my neighbour to let his wife call at such a
place in London, having previously sent word to John Lilly
what he should give her to bring. I told him, moreover, to
send a pyx and a number of small hosts, that I might be able
to reserve the Blessed Sacrament. He provided all I told him,
and the good lady got them safely to her husband's cell. So
on the appointed day I went over with my gaoler, and stayed
with my fellow-prisoner that night and the next day; but the
gaoler exacted a promise that not a word of this should be said
to the gentleman's wife. The next morning, then, said I Mass,
to my great consolation; and that confessor of Christ communicated,
after having been so many years deprived of that
favour. In this Mass I consecrated also two-and-twenty particles,
which I reserved in the pyx with a corporal; these I took back
with me to my cell, and for many days renewed the divine
banquet with ever fresh delight and consolation.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XIX.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now while we were together that day, I&mdash;though nothing was less
in my thoughts when I came over than any idea of escape (for I
sought only our true deliverer, Jesus Christ, as He was prefigured
in the little ash-baked loaf of Elias, that I might with more
strength and courage travel the rest of my way even to the Mount
of God),&mdash;seeing how close this part of the Tower was to the
moat by which it was surrounded, began to think with myself that
it were a possible thing for a man to descend by a rope from the
top of the building to the other side of the moat. I asked my
companion, therefore, what he thought about it, and whether it
seemed possible to him. <q>Certainly,</q> said he, <q>it could be done,
<pb n='cxviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxviii'/>
if a man had some real and true friends to assist him, who
would not shrink from exposing themselves to danger to rescue
one they loved.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>There is no want of such friends,</q> I replied, <q>if only the
thing is feasible and worth while trying,</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>For my part,</q> said he, <q>I should only be too glad to make
the attempt; since it would be far better for me to live even in
hiding, where I could enjoy the Sacraments and the company of
good men, than to spend my life here in solitude between four
walls.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well, then,</q> I answered, <q>let us commend the matter to
God in prayer; in the meanwhile I will write to my Superior,
and what he thinks best we will do.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While we remained together, we took counsel on all the
details that would have to be carried out, if the plan were adopted.
I returned that night to my cell, and wrote a letter to Father
Garnett by John Lilly, putting all the circumstances before him.
He answered me that the thing should be attempted by all
means, if I thought it could be done without danger to my life
in the descent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Upon this I wrote to</q> Mr. Wiseman, <q rend='pre'>my former host, telling
him that an escape in this way could be managed, but that the
matter must be communicated to as few as possible, lest it should
get noised about and stopped. I appointed, moreover, John Lilly
and Richard Fulwood, the latter of whom was at that time serving
Father Garnett, if they were willing to expose themselves to the
peril, to come on such a night to the outer bank of the moat
opposite the little tower in which my friend was kept, and near
the place where Master Page was apprehended, as I described
before. They were to bring with them a rope, one end of which
they were to tie to a stake; then we, from the leads on the top
of the tower, would throw over to them a ball of lead with a stout
string attached, such as men use for sewing up bales of goods.
This they would find in the dark by the noise it would make in
falling, and would attach the string to the free end of their rope,
so that we, who retained one end of the string, would thus be able
to pull the rope up. I ordered, moreover, that they should have
on their breasts a white paper or handkerchief, that we might
<pb n='cxix'/><anchor id='Pgcxix'/>
recognize them as friends before throwing out our string, and that
they should come provided with a boat in which we might quickly
make our escape.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When these arrangements had been made and a night fixed,
yet my host wished that a less hazardous attempt should first be
made, by trying whether my gaoler could be bribed to let me
out, which he could easily do by permitting a disguise. John
Lilly therefore offered him, on the part of a friend of mine, a
thousand florins [100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] on the spot, and a hundred florins [10<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>]
yearly for his life, if he would agree to favour my escape. The
man would not listen to anything of the kind, saying he should
have to live an outcast if he did so, and should be sure to be
hanged if ever he was caught. Nothing, therefore, could be done
with him in this line. So we went on with our preparations
according to our previous plan; and the matter was commended
to God with many prayers by all those to whom the secret
was committed. One gentleman, indeed, heir to a large estate,
made a vow to fast once a week during his life if I escaped safely.
When the appointed night came, I prevailed on the gaoler, by
entreaties and bribes, to allow me to visit my friend. So he
locked us both in together with bolts and bars of iron as usual,
and departed. But as he had also locked the inside door that
led to the roof, we had to loosen the stone into which the bolt
shot with our knives, or otherwise we could not get out. This
we succeeded in doing at length, and mounted the leads softly
and without a light, for a sentinel was placed in the garden every
night, so that we durst not even speak to each other but in a very
low whisper.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>About midnight we saw the boat coming with our friends,
namely, John Lilly, Richard Fulwood, and another, who had been
my gaoler in the former prison, through whom they procured the
boat, and who steered the boat himself. They neared the shore;
but just as they were about to land, some one came out of one
of the poor cottages thereabouts, and seeing their boat making
for the shore, hailed them, taking them for fishermen. The man
indeed returned to his bed without suspecting anything, but our
boatmen durst not venture to land till they thought the man had
gone to sleep again. They paddled about so long, however, that
<pb n='cxx'/><anchor id='Pgcxx'/>
the time slipped away, and it became impossible to accomplish
anything that night; so they returned by London Bridge. But
the tide was now flowing so strongly, that their boat was forced
against some piles there fixed to break the force of the water, so
that they could neither get on nor get back. Meanwhile, the tide
was still rising, and now came so violently on the boat that it
seemed as if it would be upset at every wave. Being in these
straits, they commended themselves to God by prayers, and called
for help from men by their cries.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All this while we on the top of the tower heard them shouting,
and saw men coming out on the bank of the river with candles,
running up and getting into their boats to rescue those in danger.
Many boats approached them, but none durst go up to them,
fearing the force of the current.<note place='foot'>The number of piers in Old London Bridge was so large, and offered
so great an obstruction to the water, that it was always a service of danger to
pass under the arches while the tide was running, and often the river formed
a regular cataract at this part.</note> So they stood there in a sort of
circle round them, spectators of their peril, but not daring to
assist. I recognized Richard Fulwood's voice in the shouts, and
said, <q>I know it is our friends who are in danger.</q> My companion
indeed did not believe I could distinguish any one's voice at that
great distance;<note place='foot'>The distance would be something over half a mile.</note> but I knew it well, and groaned inwardly to
think that such devoted men were in peril of their lives for my
sake. We prayed fervently, therefore, for them, for we saw that
they were not yet saved, though many had gone to assist them.
Then we saw a light let down from the bridge,<note place='foot'>Our readers will remember that at this time each side of the bridge was
lined with houses, which looked sheer down into the river.</note> and a sort of
basket attached to a rope, by which they might be drawn up, if
they could reach it. This it seems they were not able to do.
But God had regard to the peril of His servants, and at last there
came a strong sea-boat with six sailors, who worked bravely, and
bringing their boat up to the one in danger, took out Lilly and
Fulwood. Immediately they had got out, the boat they had left
capsized before the third could be rescued, as if it had only kept
right for the sake of the two who were Catholics. However, by
God's mercy, the one who was thrown into the river caught a
<pb n='cxxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxi'/>
rope that was let down from the bridge, and was so dragged up
and saved. So they were all rescued and got back to their
homes.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XX.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the following day<note place='foot'>Oct. 4, 1597, says Father Bartoli (<hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, p. 426) quoting Father
Garnett's letter of Oct. 8.</note> John Lilly wrote me by the gaoler as
usual. What could I expect him to say but this: <q>We see, and
have proved it by our peril, that it is not God's will we should
proceed any further in this business.</q> But I found him saying
just the contrary. For he began his letter as follows: <q>It was
not the will of God that we should accomplish our desire last
night; still He rescued us from a great danger, that we might
succeed better the next time. What is put off is not cut off:<note place='foot'>Quod differtur, non aufertur (MS.).</note> so
we mean to come again to-night, with God's help.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My companion, on seeing such constancy joined with such
strong and at the same time pious affection, was greatly consoled,
and did not doubt success. But I had great ado to obtain leave
from the gaoler to remain another night out of my cell; and had
misgivings that he would discover the loosening of the stone when
he locked the door again. He, however, remarked nothing of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the meantime I had written three letters to be left behind.
One was to the gaoler, justifying myself for taking this step
without a word to him; I told him I was but exercising my right,
since I was detained in prison without any crime, and added that
I would always remember him in my prayers, if I could not help
him in any other way. I wrote this letter with the hope that if
the man were taken into custody for my escape, it might help to
show that he was not to blame. The second letter was to the
Lieutenant, in which I still further exonerated the gaoler, protesting
before God that he knew nothing whatever about my escape,
which was, of course, perfectly true, and that he certainly would
not have allowed it if he had suspected anything. This I confirmed
by repeating the very tempting offer which had been made
him and which he had refused. As to his having allowed me to
go to another prisoner's cell, I said I had extorted it from him
with the greatest difficulty by repeated importunities, and therefore
<pb n='cxxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxii'/>
it would not be right that he should suffer death for it. The third
letter was to the Lords of the Council, in which I stated first the
causes which moved me to the recovery of my liberty, of which I
had been unjustly deprived. It was not so much the mere love
of freedom, I said, as the love of souls which were daily perishing
in England that led me to attempt the escape, in order that I
might assist in bringing them back from sin and heresy. As for
matters of State, as they had hitherto found me averse to meddling
with them, so they might be sure that I should continue the same.
Besides this, I exonerated the Lieutenant and gaoler from all
consent to, or connivance at, my escape, assuring them that I had
recovered my liberty entirely by my own and my friends' exertions.
I prepared another letter also, which would be taken next morning
to my gaoler, not, however, by John Lilly, but by another, as I
shall narrate presently.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At the proper hour we mounted again on the leads. The
boat arrived and put to shore without any interruption. The
schismatic, my former gaoler, remained with the boat, and the
two Catholics came with the rope. It was a new rope, for they
had lost the former one in the river on occasion of their disaster.
They fastened the rope to a stake, as I had told them; they
found the leaden ball which we threw, and tied the string to the
rope. We had great difficulty, however, in pulling up the rope,
for it was of considerable thickness, and double too. In fact,
Father Garnett ordered this arrangement, fearing lest, otherwise,
the rope might break by the weight of my body. But now
another element of danger showed itself, which we had not
reckoned on: for the distance was so great between the tower
and the stake to which the rope was attached, that it seemed to
stretch horizontally rather than slopingly; so that we could not
get along it merely by our weight, but would have to propel
ourselves by some exertion of our own. We proved this first by
a bundle we had made of books and some other things wrapped
up in my cloak. This bundle we placed on the double rope to
see if it would slide down of itself, but it stuck at once. And it
was well it did; for if it had gone out of our reach before it stuck,
we should never have got down ourselves. So we took the
bundle back and left it behind.</q>
</p>

<pb n='cxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxiii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My companion, who had before spoken of the descent as a
thing of the greatest ease, now changed his mind, and confessed
it to be very difficult and full of danger. <q>However,</q> said
he, <q>I shall most certainly be hanged if I remain now, for we
cannot throw the rope back without its falling into the water, and
so betraying us both and our friends. I will therefore descend,
please God, preferring to expose myself to danger with the hope
of freedom, rather than to remain here with good certainty of
being hanged.</q> So he said a prayer, and took to the rope. He
descended fairly enough, for he was strong and vigorous, and
the rope was then taut: his weight, however, slackened it
considerably, which made the danger for me greater, and though
I did not then notice this, yet I found it out afterwards when I
came to make the trial.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So commending myself to God, to our Lord Jesus, to the
Blessed Virgin, to my Guardian Angel, and all my Patrons,
particularly to Father Southwell, who had been imprisoned
near this place for nearly three years before his martyrdom,
to Father Walpole, and to all our Saints, I took the rope
in my right hand and held it also with my left arm; then
I twisted my legs about it, to prevent falling, in such a way
that the rope passed between my shins. I descended some
three or four yards face downwards, when suddenly my body
swung round by its own weight and hung under the rope.
The shock was so great that I nearly lost my hold, for I
was still but weak, especially in the hands and arms. In
fact, with the rope so slack and my body hanging beneath it,
I could hardly get on at all. At length, I made a shift to get on
as far as the middle of the rope, and there I stuck, my breath and
my strength failing me, neither of which were very copious to
begin with. After a little time, the Saints assisting me, and my
good friends below drawing me to them by their prayers, I got on
a little further and stuck again, thinking I should never be able to
accomplish it. Yet I was loath to drop into the water as long
as I could possibly hold on. After another rest, therefore, I
summoned what remained of my strength, and helping myself
with legs and arms as well as I could, I got as far as the wall on
the other side of the moat. But my feet only touched the top of
<pb n='cxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxiv'/>
the wall, and my whole body hung horizontally, my head being
no higher than my feet, so slack was the rope. In such a position,
and exhausted as I was, it was hopeless to expect to get over the
wall by my own unaided strength. So John Lilly got on to
the wall somehow or other (for, as he afterwards asserted, he
never knew how he got there), took hold of my feet, and by
them pulled me to him, and got me over the wall on to the
ground. But I was quite unable to stand, so they gave me some
cordial waters and restoratives, which they had brought on
purpose. By the help of these I managed to walk to the boat,
into which we all entered. They had, however, before leaving
the wall, untied the rope from the stake and cut off a part of it,
so that it hung down the wall of the tower. We had previously,
indeed, determined to pull it away altogether, and had with this
object passed it round a great gun on the tower without
knotting it. But God so willed it that we were not able by any
exertion to get it away; and if we had succeeded, it would
certainly have made a loud splash in the water, and perhaps have
brought us into a worse danger.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On entering the boat we gave hearty thanks to God, Who
had delivered us from the hand of the persecutor and from all
the expectation of the people; we returned our best thanks also
to those who had exposed themselves to such labours and perils
for our sakes. We went some considerable distance in the boat
before landing. After we had landed I sent the gentleman, my
companion, with John Lilly, to my house, of which I have before
spoken, which was managed by that saintly widow, Mistress Line.
I myself, however, with Richard Fulwood, went to a house which
Father Garnett had in the suburbs; and there Little John and I,
a little before daylight, mounted our horses, which he had ready
there for the purpose, and rode straight off to Father Garnett,
who was then living a short distance in the country.<note place='foot'>This may very likely be White Webbs in Enfield Chase.</note> We got
there by dinner-time, and great rejoicing there was on my arrival,
and much thanksgiving to God at my having thus escaped from
the hands of my enemies in the name of the Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the meanwhile I had sent Richard Fulwood with a couple
of horses to a certain spot, that he might be ready to ride off with
<pb n='cxxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxv'/>
my gaoler, if he wished to consult his immediate safety. For I
had a letter written, of which I made previous mention, which
was to be taken to him early in the morning at the place where
he was accustomed to meet John Lilly. Lilly, however, did not
carry the letter, for I had bidden him remain quiet within doors
until such time as the storm which was to be expected had blown
over. So another, who also knew the gaoler, took the letter, and
gave it to him at the usual meeting-place. He was indeed
surprised at another's coming, but took the letter without remark,
and was about to depart with the intention of delivering it to me
as usual; but the other stopped him, saying, <q>The letter is for
you, and not for any one else.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>For me?</q> said the gaoler, <q>from whom then does it come?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>From a friend of yours,</q> replied the other; <q>but who he is I
don't know.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The gaoler was still more astonished at this, and said, <q>I
cannot myself read; if, then, it is a matter which requires
immediate attention, pray read it for me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So the man that brought the letter read it for him. It was
to the effect that I had made my escape from prison; and here I
added a few words on the reasons of my conduct, for the purpose
of calming his mind. Then I told him, that though I was nowise
bound to protect him from the consequences, as I had but used
my just right, yet, as I had found him faithful in the things which
I had intrusted him with, I was loath to leave him in the lurch.
If, therefore, he was inclined to provide for his own safety immediately,
there was a horse waiting for him with a guide who would
bring him to a place of safety, sufficiently distant from London,
where I would maintain him for life, allowing him two hundred
florins [20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] yearly, which would support him comfortably. I
added that if he thought of accepting this offer, he had better
settle his affairs as quickly as possible, and betake himself to the
place which the bearer of the letter would show him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The poor man was, as may well be supposed, in a great
fright, and accepted the offer; but, as he was about to return
to the Tower to settle matters and get his wife away, a mate of
his met him, and said, <q>Be off with you as quick as you can; for
your prisoners have escaped from the little tower, and Master
<pb n='cxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxvi'/>
Lieutenant is looking for you everywhere. Woe to you if he
finds you!</q> So, returning all in a tremble to the bearer of the
letter, he besought him for the love of God to take him at once
to where the horse was waiting for him. He took him, therefore,
and handed him over to Richard Fulwood, who was to be his
guide. Fulwood took him to the house of a friend of mine
residing at the distance of a hundred miles from London, to
whom I had written, asking him, if such a person should come,
to take him in and provide for him. I warned him, however, not
to put confidence in him, nor to acknowledge any acquaintance
with me. I told him that Richard Fulwood would reimburse him
for all the expenses, but that he must never listen to the man if
at any time he began to talk about me or about himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Everything was done as I had arranged; my friend received
no damage, and the gaoler remained there out of danger. After
a year he went into another county, and, becoming a Catholic,
lived there comfortably for some five years with his family on the
annuity which I sent him regularly according to promise. He
died at the end of those five years, having been through that
trouble rescued by God from the occasions of sin, and, as I hope,
brought to Heaven. I had frequently in the prison sounded him
in matters of religion; and though his reason was perfectly convinced,
I was never able to move his will. My temporal escape,
then, I trust, was by the sweet disposition of God's merciful
providence the occasion of his eternal salvation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Lieutenant of the Tower, when he could not find either
his prisoners or their gaoler, hastened to the Lords of the Council
with the letters which he had found. They wondered greatly
that I should have been able to escape in such a way; but one
of the chief members of the Council, as I afterwards heard, said
to a gentleman who was in attendance that he was exceedingly
glad I had got off. And when the Lieutenant demanded
authority and assistance to search all London for me, and any
suspected places in the neighbourhood, they all told him it would
be of no use. <q>You cannot hope to find him,</q> said they; <q>for if
he had such determined friends as to accomplish what they have,
depend upon it they will have made further arrangements, and
provided horses and hiding-places to keep him quite out of your
<pb n='cxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxvii'/>
reach.</q> They made search, however, in one or two places, but
no one of any mark was taken that I could ever hear of.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For my part, I remained quietly with Father Garnett for a
few days, both to recruit myself and to allow the talk about my
escape to subside. Then my former hosts, who had proved
themselves such devoted friends, urged my return to them, first
to their London house close to the Clink prison, where they
were as yet residing. So I went to them, and remained there
in secrecy, admitting but very few visitors; nor did I ever leave
the house except at night, a practice I always observed when in
London, though at this time I did even this very sparingly, and
visited only a few of my chief friends.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At this time I also visited my house, which was then under
the care of Mistress Line, afterwards martyred. Another future
martyr was then residing there of whom I have previously spoken,
namely, Mr. Robert Drury, Priest. In this house about this time
I received a certain parson who had been chaplain to the Earl of
Essex in his expedition against the Spanish King, when he took
Cadiz. He was an eloquent man and learned in languages; and
when converted to the Catholic faith he had abandoned divers
great preferments, nay, had likewise endured imprisonment for
his religion. Hearing that he had an opportunity of making his
escape, I offered that he should come to my house. There I
maintained him for two or three months, during which time I
gave him the Spiritual Exercises. In the course of his retreat, he
came to the determination of offering himself to the Society;
upon which I asked him to tell me candidly how he, who had
been bred up in Calvin's bosom as it were, had been accustomed
to military life, and had learnt in heresy and had long been
accustomed to prefer his own will to other people's, could bring
himself to enter the Society, where he knew, or certainly should
know, that the very opposite principles prevailed. To this he
replied, <q>There are three things, in fact, which have especially
induced me to take this step. First, because I see that heretics
and evil livers hold the Society in far greater detestation than
they do any other Religious Order; from which I judge that it has
the Spirit of God in an especial degree, which the spirit of the
devil cannot endure, and that it has been ordained by God to
<pb n='cxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxviii'/>
destroy heresy, and wage war against sin in general. Secondly,
because all ecclesiastical dignities are excluded by its Constitutions,
whence it follows that there is in it a greater certainty of a
pure intention; and as its more eminent members are not taken
from it for the Episcopate, it is more likely to retain its first
fervour and its high estimation for virtue and learning. Thirdly,
because in it obedience is cultivated with particular care, a virtue
for which I have the greatest veneration, not only on account
of the excellent effects produced thereby in the soul, but also
because all things must needs go on well in a body where the
wills of the members are bound together, and all are directed
by God.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>These were his reasons; so I sent him into Belgium, that
he might be forwarded to the College at Rome by Father Holt,
giving him three hundred florins [30<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] for his expenses. I gave
the Spiritual Exercises also to some others in that house before
I gave it up, among whom was a pious and good Priest named
Woodward, who also found a vocation to the Society, and afterwards
passed into Belgium with the intention of entering it;
but as there was a great want of English Priests in the army at
the time, he was appointed to that work, and died in it, greatly
loved and reverenced by all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I did not, however, keep that house long after the recovery
of my liberty, because it was now known to a large number of
persons, and was frequented during my imprisonment by many
more than I should have permitted if I had been free. My
principal reason, however, for giving it up was because it was
known to the person who had been the cause of my being sent to
the Tower. He had indeed expressed sorrow for his act, and
had written to me to beg my pardon, which I freely gave him;
yet, as he was released from prison soon after my escape, and I
found that those among whom he had lived had no very good
opinion of his character, I did not think it well that a thing
involving the safety of many should remain within his knowledge.
Mistress Line, also, a woman of singular prudence and
virtue, was of the same mind. So I determined to make other
arrangements as soon as possible....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It seemed best, therefore, that Mistress Line should lodge
<pb n='cxxix'/><anchor id='Pgcxxix'/>
for a space by herself in a hired room of a private house; while
I, who did not wish to be without a place in London where I
could safely admit some of my principal friends, and perhaps
house a Priest from time to time, joined with a prudent and pious
gentleman, who had a wife of similar character, in renting a large
and spacious house between us. Half the house was to be for
their use and the other half for mine, in which I had a fair chapel
well provided and ornamented. Hither I resorted when I came
to London, and here also I sent from time to time those I would,
paying a certain sum for their board. In this way I expended
scarce half the amount I did formerly under the other arrangement,
when I was obliged to maintain a household whether there
were any guests in the house or not; though indeed it was seldom
that the house was empty of guests.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I made this new provision for my own and my friends'
accommodation just in good time; for most certainly had I
remained in my former house I should have been taken again.
The thing happened in this wise. The Priest who, as I have
related, got me promoted from a more obscure prison to a
nobler one, began to importune me with continual letters that
I would grant him an interview. Partly by delaying to answer
him, partly by excusing myself on the score of occupation, I put
him off for about half a year. At length he urged his request
very pressingly, and complained to me by letter that I showed
contempt of him. I sent him no answer, but on a convenient
occasion, knowing where he lodged, I despatched a friend to him
to tell him that if he wished to see me, he must come at once
with the messenger. I warned the messenger, however, not to
permit any delay, nor to allow him to write anything nor address
any one on the way if he wished to have an interview with me.
I arranged, moreover, that he should be brought not to any
house, but to a certain field near one of the Inns of Court, which
was a common promenade, and that the messenger should walk
there alone with him till I came. It was at night, and there was
a bright moon. I came there with a couple of friends, in case
any attempt should be made against me, and making a half
circuit outside (that he might not know in what part of London I
lived), I happened to enter the field near the house of a Catholic
<pb n='cxxx'/><anchor id='Pgcxxx'/>
which adjoined it; and our good friend catching first sight of
me near this house, thought perhaps that I came out of it, and in
fact the Archpriest was lodging in it at the time. However that
may be, I found him there walking and waiting for me, and when
I had heard all he had to say, I saw that there was nothing which
he had not already said in his letters, and to which he had
not had my answer. My suspicion was therefore increased, and
certainly not without reason. For within a day or two that
corner house near which he saw me enter the field, and my old
house which I had lately left (though he knew not that I had left
it), were both of them surrounded and strictly searched on the same
night and at the same hour. The Archpriest was all but caught
in the one; he had just time to get into a hiding-place, and so
escaped.<note place='foot'>Atkinson was not always so unsuccessful. Sir Robert Cecil endorsed the
letter quoted in a former note, <q>Atkinson's letter, the Priest that discovered
Tychburn and was brought me by Mr. Fouler.</q> Thomas Tichburn suffered at
Tyburn, April 20, 1601, for his Priesthood.</note> The search lasted two whole days in the other house,
which the Priest knew me to have occupied at one time. The
Lieutenant of the Tower and the Knight Marshal<note place='foot'>The Knight Marshal had jurisdiction within the precincts of the Court,
that is, twelve miles from the lodging of the Sovereign, even on a progress,
though not a chase. The Marshalsea was the prison originally attached to the
King's house, and at first was intended only for the committal of persons accused
of offences within the jurisdiction of the Knight Marshal. It stood in High-street,
Southwark, on the south side, between King-street and Mermaid-court,
over against Union-street (Cunningham's <hi rend='italic'>Handbook of London</hi>, p. 316). Queen
Elizabeth's Knight Marshal was Sir Thomas Gerard, already mentioned as
created by King James Lord Gerard of Gerard's Bromley.</note> conducted the
searches in person, a task they never undertake unless one of
their prisoners has escaped. From these circumstances it is
sufficiently clear, both of whom they were in search and from
whom they got their information.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But when they found me not (nor indeed did they find the
Priest who was then in the house, living with a Catholic to whom
I had let it), they sent pursuivants on the next day to the house
of my host, who had by this time returned to his country seat,
but by God's mercy they did not find me there either. It was
well, therefore, that I acted cautiously with the above-mentioned
Priest, and also that I had so opportunely changed my residence
in London.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='cxxxi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxi'/>

<div>
<head>XXI.</head>

<p>
<q>I saw also that it would soon be necessary for me to give up
my present residence in the country, and betake myself elsewhere;
otherwise those good and faithful friends of mine,</q> the
Wisemans, <q rend='pre'>would always be suffering some annoyance for my
sake. I proposed the matter, therefore, to them, but they refused
to listen to me in this point, though in all other things they were
most obedient. But I thought more of their peace than of their
wishes, however pious these wishes were; and therefore I laid
the matter before my Superior,<note place='foot'>About this time Father Garnett thought of sending Father Gerard out of
England, evidently from fear lest, owing to his zeal, he should be recaptured
and be still more hardly dealt with, for on March 31, 1598, he wrote to Rome,
probably to Father Persons: <q>Father Gerard is much dismayed this day when
I wrote to him to prepare himself to go. He came to me of purpose. Indeed
he is very profitable to me, and his going would be wondered at. I hope he
will walk warily enough.... You know my mind; if you think it good, I
desire his stay. All the rest are well</q> (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 551).</note> who approved my views. So I
obtained from Father Garnett another of ours, a pious and
learned man, whom I had known at Rome, and who at that
time was companion to Father Ouldcorne, of blessed memory;
this was Father Richard Banks, now professed of four vows.
I took him to live with me for a time, that I might by degrees
introduce him into the family in my place; and in the meantime
I made more frequent excursions than usual.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In one of these excursions I visited a noble family, by
whom I had long been invited and often expected, but I had
never yet been able to visit them on account of my pressing
occupations. Here I found the lady of the house, a widow,
very pious and devout, but at this present overwhelmed with
grief at the loss of her husband. She had, indeed, been so
affected by this loss that for a whole year she scarce stirred out
of her chamber, and for the next three years which had intervened
before my visit, had never brought herself to go to that
part of the mansion in which her husband had died. To this
grief and trouble were added certain anxieties about the bringing
up of her son, who was yet a child under his mother's care. He
was one of the first Barons of the realm; but his parents had
<pb n='cxxxii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxii'/>
suffered so much for the Faith, and had mortgaged so much of
their property to meet the constant exactions of an heretical
Government, that the remaining income was scarcely sufficient
for their proper maintenance. But a wise woman builds up her
house and is proved in it....</q>
</p>

<p>
This lady was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Roper, who
was raised to the peerage in 1616 as Lord Teynham. In 1590<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 233, n. 3.</note>
she married George, the second son of William, Lord Vaux of
Harrowden, but her husband died in 1594, during the lifetime of
his father. When in the following year her father-in-law also died,
she was left in charge of her infant son, Edward fourth Baron
Vaux.
</p>

<p>
As she wished me to reside in her house, <q rend='pre'>on my return to
London I proposed the matter to Father Garnett, who was much
rejoiced at the offer, knowing the place to be one where much
good might be done both directly and indirectly. He said, too,
that the offer had occurred most opportunely, for that there
were some Catholics in another county more to the north,
where Catholics were more numerous and there was no Priest
of the Society, who had been long petitioning for the Father at
present stationed at that house, and who would much rejoice
at the prospect of having him among them. To this I urged
that the place was large enough for two, and that I very much
desired to have a companion of the Society with me, and I
requested that he would assign me Father John Percy, with
whom I had become acquainted during my imprisonment, not
indeed personally, but by frequent interchange of letters. This
Father had been brought prisoner from Flanders to Holland,<note place='foot'><q>He was sent to Tournay for his Noviceship in 1594, and towards the
end of his second year over-application had so injured his head that he had to
be forbidden to use any kind of prayer. Sent to recruit in his native air, he
passed through Holland on his way to England. At Flushing he was taken
by some English soldiers. The letter he was carrying showing who he was,
they threatened him with torture unless he would say who had brought him
over from Rotterdam. He was ready to confess anything about himself, but
he would say nothing of any one else; so, instead of offering, as he had hoped
to do that day, the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ, he offered that of his own,
to undergo anything rather than injure others. They hung him up by the
hands to a pulley, and then tortured him by twisting a sailor's rope round his
head. During the torture he fixed his mind on the eternity of either pain or
joy, and uttered nothing but <q>O eternity!</q> The harm the soldiers tried to do
him turned out a remedy; for the head-ache and singing in the head, from
which he had suffered in the Noviceship, diminished from that time and
gradually ceased. He was taken to London in custody and committed to
Bridewell, where his cell was an utterly unfurnished turret. He bed was the
brick floor and a little straw, till he was helped by the care and charity of his
Catholic fellow-prisoners, and of our Father Gerard. The latter, who was in
the Clink, kept up a secret correspondence with him, and came to his help
both with his advice and money. After about seven months he succeeded in
making his escape through the tiling, together with two other Priests and
seven laymen</q> (Father More, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Provinciæ</hi>, l. viii., c. 23).</note>
<pb n='cxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxiii'/>
where he was recognized and tortured; he was afterwards thrown
into the foul gaol of Bridewell, and after remaining there some
time made a shift to escape from a window with another Priest,
letting himself down with a rope. Mistress Line made him
welcome in my house, where he tarried for a time; but soon after
went down into the county of York, and dwelt there with a pious
Catholic. In this part he made himself so dear to every one, that
though I had Father Garnett's consent, it was a full year before
I could get him away from them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Since now to the desire of this noble widow was added the
approval of Father Garnett, I so settled my affairs as to provide
amply for the security and advantage of my former hosts. For I
left with them Father Banks, a most superior man in every
respect; and although at first my old friends did not value him
so much, yet, as they became better acquainted, they found that
the good account I had given them was no more than the
truth, and soon came to esteem him as a father. I often
afterwards visited their house, where I had found so great faith
and piety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I was domiciled in my new residence, I began by
degrees to wean my hostess' mind from that excessive grief;
showing how that we ought to mourn moderately only over our
dead, and not to grieve like those who have no hope. I added
that as her husband had become a Catholic before his death, one
little prayer would do him more good than many tears; that our
tears should be reserved for our own and others' sins, for our
own souls stood in need of floods of that cleansing water,
and it was to the concerns of our own souls that all our
<pb n='cxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxiv'/>
thoughts and labours should be turned. I then taught her the
use of meditation, finding her quite capable of profiting by it,
for her mental powers were of a very high order. I thus gradually
brought her first to change that old style of grief for a more
worthy one; then to give eternal concerns the preference over
worldly matters; and to consider how she might transform her
life, which before was good and holy, into better and holier, by
endeavouring as much as she could to imitate the life of our Lord
and of His Saints.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>She was ready to set up her residence wherever I judged it
best for the good of religion, whether in London,<note place='foot'>The confession of Ralph Myller (9 Oct. 1584) gives us an insight into the
late Lord Vaux's London house: <q>This examinant did afterwards meet one
Robert Browne, who hath an uncle a Priest with the Lord Vaux, who is a
little man with white head, and a little brown hair on his face, goeth in an
ash-colour doublet coat and a gown faced with cony, and he was made Priest
long sithence at Cambray as this examinate thinketh. This examinant spoke
with the Lord Vaux and with his lady at Hackney, after that his son, Mr.
George, and the said Robert Browne had told him that this examinant was a
tailor of Rhemes; and on Sunday was fortnight this examinant did hear Mass
there, whereat were present about xviii. persons, being my lord's household,
and the Priest last before named said the Mass. The said Priest lieth in a
chamber beyond the hall, on the left hand the stair that leadeth to the
chambers, and the Mass is said in the chapel, being right over the port
entering into the hall; and the way into it is up the stair aforesaid, on the
left hand, at the further end of the gallery: and there is a very fair crucifix of
silver</q> (P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 173, n. 64).</note> or in the most
remote part of the island, as she often protested to me. I
considered, however, that though a residence in or near London
would be better for the gaining of souls, yet that it was not at
present very safe for me; nor, indeed, could she remain there in
private, since she was well known for a Catholic, and the Lords of
the Council demanded from her frequent accounts of her son, the
Baron, where and how he was educated. Moreover, as she had
the management of her son's estate while he was a minor,
stewards and bailiffs, and other such persons, must have constant
communication with her; so that it was quite out of the question
her living near London under an assumed name; yet this was
absolutely necessary if a person wished to carry on the good work
in that neighbourhood. It was thus those ladies did with whom
Father Garnett lived so long, who were in fact sisters of this lady's
<pb n='cxxxv'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxv'/>
deceased husband, one unmarried, the other a widow.<note place='foot'>Anne Vaux and Eleanor, widow of Edward Brooksby, daughters of
William third Lord Vaux, by his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John
Beaumont of Gracedieu, in Leicestershire, Esq. The mother of George Vaux
was Mary, sister of Sir Thomas Tresham, of Rushton, in Northamptonshire,
Knight.</note> I saw,
therefore, no fitter place for her to fix her residence than where
she was among her own people, where she had the chief people
of the county connected with her and her son, either by blood
or friendship.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The only difficulty which remained was about the exact
spot. The house in which she was actually living was not only
old, but antiquated. It had been the residence of her husband's
father, who had married a wife who was a better hand at spending
than at gathering, and consequently the house was very poorly
appointed for a family of their dignity. There was another and
larger house of theirs at</q> Great Harrowden, <q rend='pre'>a distance of
about three miles, which had been the old family seat. This
had also been neglected, so that it was in some part quite
ruinous, and not fit for our purpose, namely, to receive the
Catholic gentry who might come to visit me. In addition to
this, it was not well adapted for defence against any sudden
intrusions of the heretics, and consequently we should not be
able to be as free there as my hostess wished. Her desire was
to have a house where we might as nearly as possible conform
ourselves to the manner of life followed in our Colleges; and
this in the end she brought about.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>She sought everywhere for such a house, and we looked at
many houses in the county; but something or other was always
wanting to her wishes. At last we found a house which had been
built by the late Chancellor of England,<note place='foot'>Sir Christopher Hatton, who died childless, November 21, 1591, had
built a country house at Stoke Pogis, Bucks (Campbell's <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the
Chancellors</hi>, 3rd edit., vol. ii., p. 180).</note> who had died childless,
and was now to be let for a term of years. It was truly a princely
place, large and well built, surrounded by gardens and orchards,
and so far removed from other houses that no one could notice
our coming in or going out. This house she took on payment of
fifteen thousand florins [1,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>], and began to fit it up for our
<pb n='cxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxvi'/>
accommodation. She wished to finish the alterations before we
removed thither; but man proposes, and God disposes as He
wills, though always for the best, and for the true good of His
elect.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I came to the lady's house, she had a great number of
servants, some heretics, others indeed Catholics, but allowing
themselves too much liberty. By degrees things got into better
order; some became Catholics; others, through public and
private exhortations, became by the grace of God more fervent;
and some, of whom there did not appear any hope of amendment,
were dismissed. There was one who brought great
trouble on us. For on one occasion when we were in London,
either from thoughtlessness or loquacity, or because the yoke
of a stricter discipline, now begun in the family, sat uneasily
upon him, he said to a false brother that I had lately come to live
at his lady's house, and had carried on such and such doings
there; and that I was then in London at such a house, naming
the house of which I rented half, as I have before said; he told
him also that he himself had gone to that house with his lady
at a time when she and I were in town on business connected
with her son, and that he had seen the master and mistress of
that house when they called on his lady, as they had often done.
My hostess had now returned into the country with this servant,
leaving me for a short time in town. But the man had left this
tale behind him, which soon came to the ears of the Council, how
that I had my residence with such a lady, and was at this
moment at such a house in London. They instantly, therefore,
commissioned two Justices of the Peace to search the house.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I, who had no inkling of such a danger, had remained in
town for certain business, and was giving a retreat to three
gentlemen in the house before mentioned. One of these three
gentlemen was Master Roger Lee, now Minister in the English
College of St. Omers. He was a gentleman of high family, and
of so noble a character and such winning manners that he
was a universal favourite, especially with the nobility, in whose
company he constantly was, being greatly given to hunting,
hawking, and all other noble sports. He was, indeed, excellent
at everything, but he was withal a Catholic, and so bent on the
<pb n='cxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxvii'/>
study of virtue that he was meditating a retreat from the world
and a more immediate following of Christ. He used frequently
to visit me when I was in the Clink prison, and I clearly saw
that he was called to greater things than catching birds of the
air, and that he was meant rather to be a catcher of men. I had
now, therefore, fixed a time with this gentleman and good friend
of mine, in which he should seek out, by means of the Spiritual
Exercises, the strait path that leads to life, under the guidance of
Him Who is Himself the Way and the Life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But while he and the others were engaged privately in their
chambers in the study of this heroic philosophy, suddenly the
storm burst upon us. I, too, in fact, after finishing my business
in town, had taken the opportunity of a little quiet to begin my
own retreat, giving out that I had returned into the country. I
was now in the fourth or fifth day of the retreat, when about three
o'clock in the afternoon John Lilly hurried to my room, and
without knocking, entered with his sword drawn.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Surprised at this sudden intrusion, I asked what was the
matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>It is a matter of searching the house,</q> he replied.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What house?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>This very house: and they are in it already!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In fact, they had been cunning enough to knock gently, as
friends were wont to do, and the servant opened readily to them,
without the least suspicion until he saw them rush in and scatter
themselves in all directions.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While John was telling me this, up came the searching party,
together with the mistress of the house, to the very room in which
we were. Now, just opposite to my room was the chapel, so that
from the passage the door of the chapel opened on the one hand,
and that of my room on the other. The magistrates, then, seeing
the door of the chapel open, went in, and found there an altar
richly adorned, and the priestly vestments laid out close by, so
handsome as to cause expressions of admiration from the heretics
themselves. In the meanwhile I, in the room opposite, was quite
at my wit's end what to do; for there was no hiding-place in the
room, nor any means of exit except by the open passage were the
enemy were. However, I changed the soutane which I was
<pb n='cxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxviii'/>
wearing for a secular coat, but my books and manuscript meditations,
which I had there in considerable quantities, I was quite
unable to conceal.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We stood there with our ears close to the chink of the door,
listening to catch what they said: and I heard one exclaim from
the chapel, <q>Good God! what have we found here? I had no
thoughts of coming to this house to-day!</q> From this I concluded
that it was a mere chance search, and that they had no special
warrant. Probably, therefore, I thought they had but few men
with them. So we began to consult together whether it were not
better to rush out with drawn swords, seize the keys from the
searching party, and so escape; for we should have Master Lee
and the master of the house to help us, besides two or three
men-servants. Moreover, I considered that if we should be
taken in the house, the master would certainly be visited with a
far greater punishment than what the law prescribes for resistance
to a magistrate's search.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>While we were thus deliberating, the searchers came to the
door of my room and knocked. We made no answer, but pressed
the latch hard down, for the door had no bolt or lock. As they
continued knocking, the mistress of the house said, <q>Perhaps the
man-servant who sleeps in that room may have taken away the
key. I will go and look for him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No, no,</q> said they, <q>you go nowhere without us, or you will
be hiding away something.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And so they went with her, not staying to examine whether
the door had a lock or not. Thus did God blind the eyes of the
Assyrians, that they should not find the place, nor the means of
hurting His servants, nor know where they were going.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When they had got below-stairs, the mistress of the house,
who had great presence of mind, took them into a room in which
some ladies were, the sister, namely, of my hostess in the country,
and Mistress Line; and while the magistrates were questioning
these ladies, she ran up to us, saying, <q>Quick, quick! get into
the hiding-place!</q> She had scarce said this and run down again,
before the searchers had missed her and were for remounting the
stairs. But she stood in their way on the bottom step, so that
they immediately suspected what the case was, and were eager to
<pb n='cxxxix'/><anchor id='Pgcxxxix'/>
get past. This, however, they could not do without laying
forcible hands on the lady, a thing which, as gentlemen, they
shrank from doing. One of them, however, as she stood there
purposely occupying the whole width of the stair-way, thrust his
head past her, in hopes of seeing what was going on above-stairs.
And indeed he almost caught sight of me as I passed along to
the hiding-place. For as soon as I heard the lady's words of
warning, I opened the door, and with the least possible noise
mounted from a stool to the hiding-place, which was arranged in
a secret gable of the roof. When I had myself mounted, I bade
John Lilly come up also, but he, more careful of me than of
himself, refused to follow me, saying: <q>No, Father; I shall not
come. There must be some one to own the books and papers
in your room; otherwise, upon finding them, they will never rest
till they have found you too: only pray for me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So spoke this truly faithful and prudent servant, so full of
charity as to offer his life for his friend. There was no time for
further words. I acquiesced reluctantly and closed the small
trap-door by which I had entered, but I could not open the door
of the inner hiding-place, so that I should infallibly have been
taken if they had not found John Lilly, and mistaking him for a
Priest ceased from any further search. For this was what
happened, God so disposing it, and John's prudence and
intrepidity helping thereto.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For scarcely had he removed the stool by which I mounted,
and had gone back to the room and shut the door, when the
two chiefs of the searching party again came upstairs and
knocked violently at the door, ready to break it open if the
key were not found. Then the intrepid soldier of Christ threw
open the door and presented himself undaunted to the persecutors.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Who are you?</q> they asked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>A man, as you see,</q> he replied.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But what are you? Are you a Priest?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I do not say I am a Priest,</q> replied John; <q>that is for you
to prove. But I am a Catholic certainly.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then they found there on the table all my meditations, my
breviary, and many Catholic books, and what grieved me most
<pb n='cxl'/><anchor id='Pgcxl'/>
of all to lose, my manuscript sermons and notes for sermons,
which I had been writing or compiling for the last ten years,
and which I made more account of, perhaps, than they did of
all their money. After examining all these they asked whose
they were.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>They are mine,</q> said John.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Then there can be no doubt you are a Priest. And this
cassock, whose is this?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>That is a dressing-gown, to be used for convenience now
and then.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Convinced now that they had caught a Priest, they carefully
locked up all the books and papers in a box, to be taken away
with them. Then they locked the chapel door and put their seal
upon it, and taking John by the arm they led him downstairs,
and delivered him into the custody of their officers. Now when
he entered with his captors into the room where the ladies were,
he, who at other times was always wont to conduct himself with
humility and stand uncovered in such company, now, on the
contrary, after saluting them, covered his head and sat down.
Nay, assuming a sort of authority, he said to the magistrates:
<q>These are noble ladies; it is your duty to treat them with
consideration. I do not, indeed, know them, but it is quite
evident that they are entitled to the greatest respect.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I should have mentioned that there was a second Priest in
the house with me, Father Pullen,<note place='foot'>Patrem Pulvium (MS.). We give the English form of the name on the
authority of Dr. Oliver, in his <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>, s.v. Pullen.</note> an old man, who had quite
lately made his noviceship at Rome. He luckily had a hiding-place
in his room, and had got into it at the first alarm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The ladies, therefore, now perceiving that I was safe, and that
the other Priest had also escaped, and seeing also John's assumed
dignity, could scarce refrain from showing their joy. They made
no account now of the loss of property, or the annoyance they
should have to undergo from the suspicion of having had a Priest
in the house. They wondered indeed and rejoiced, and almost
laughed to see John playing the Priest, for so well did he do it
as to deceive those deceivers, and divert them from any further
search.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='cxli'/><anchor id='Pgcxli'/>

<div>
<head>XXII.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The magistrates who had searched the house took away John
Lilly with them, and the master of the house also with his two
men-servants, under the idea that all his property would be
confiscated for harbouring a Priest.<note place='foot'>In the Public Record Office there is a letter, dated July 22, 1599,
purporting to be from Francis Cordale to his partner Balthasar Gybels, at
Antwerp, which says, <q>I wrote to you of one Mr. Heywood's house searched
and a man there taken. I have learned his name since to be John Lilly. He
is sent to the Tower upon suspicion of helping Gerard the Jesuit out of the
same place</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 271, n. 107).</note> The ladies, however,
represented that they had merely come to pay an after-dinner
visit to the mistress of the house, without knowing anything about
a Priest being there; so they were let off on giving bail to appear
when summoned. The same favour was ultimately shown to
Master Roger Lee, though it was with greater difficulty the
magistrates could be persuaded that he was only a visitor. At
last, then, they departed well satisfied, and locked up their
prisoners for the night to wait their morrow's examination.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Immediately on their departure, the mistress of the house
and those other ladies came with great joy to give me notice;
and we all joined in giving thanks to God, Who had delivered us
all from such imminent danger by the prudence and fidelity of
one. Father Pullen and I removed that very night to another
place, lest the searchers should find out their error and return.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The next day I made a long journey to my hostess' house in
the country, and caused much fear, and then much joy, as I
related all that God had done for us. Then we all heartily
commended John Lilly to God in prayer. And, indeed, there
was reason enough to do so. For the magistrates, making full
inquiries the next day, found that John had been an apothecary
in London for seven years, and then had been imprisoned
in the Clink for eight or nine more, and that he had been the
person who had communicated with me in the Tower, for the
gaoler's wife had been apprehended after her husband's flight, and
had confessed so much. They saw, therefore, clearly that they
had been tricked, and that John was not a Priest, but a Priest's
servant; and they now began to have a shrewd suspicion, though
<pb n='cxlii'/><anchor id='Pgcxlii'/>
rather too late, that I had been hidden at the time in the same
house where they caught him, especially as they found so many
books and writings which they did not doubt were mine. They
sent, therefore, to search the house again, but they found only
an empty nest, for the birds were flown.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>John was carried to the Tower and confined there in chains.
Then they examined him about my escape, and about all the
places he had been to with me since. He, seeing that his
dealings with the gaoler were already known to them, and
desirous (if God would grant him such a favour), to lay down
his life for Christ, freely confessed that it was he who had
compassed my deliverance, and that he took great pleasure in
the thought of having done so; he added that he was in the
mind to do the same again if occasion required and opportunity
offered. The gaoler, however, he exonerated, and protested that
he was not privy to the escape. With regard to the places where
he had been with me, he answered (as he had been often taught
to do) that he would bring no one into trouble, and that he would
not name a single place, for to do so would be a sin against
charity and justice. Upon this they said they would not press
him any further in words, but would convince him by deeds that
he must tell them all they wanted. John replied: <q>It is a thing
that, with the help of God, I will never do. You have me in
your power; do what God permits you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then they took him to the torture-chamber, and hung him
up in the way I have before described, and tortured him cruelly
for the space of three hours. But nothing could they wring from
him that they could use either against me or against others, so that
from that time they gave up all hope of obtaining anything against
any one from him either by force or fear. Consequently they
tortured him no more, but kept him in the closest custody for
about four months to try and tire him into compliance. Failing
also in this, and seeing that their pains availed them nothing, they
sent him to another prison, where prisoners are usually sent who
are awaiting execution, and probably it was their intention to deal
that way with him, but God otherwise determined. For after
a long detention here, and having been allowed a little communication
with other Catholic prisoners, he was asked by a certain
<pb n='cxliii'/><anchor id='Pgcxliii'/>
Priest to assist him in making his escape. Turning his attention,
therefore, to the matter, he found a way by which he delivered
both the Priest and himself from captivity.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I ought not, however, to omit an incident that happened
during his detention in the Tower, since it is in such things that
the dealings of God's providence are often to be very plainly
recognized. While he was under examination about me and
others of the Society, Wade, who was at that time the chief
persecutor, asked him if he knew Garnett. John said he
did not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>No?</q> said Wade, with a sour smile; <q>and you don't know
his house in the Spital<note place='foot'>Tali loco qui vocatur <hi rend='italic'>Spitell</hi> (MS). Spitalfields, a district without
Bishopsgate, once belonged to the Priory and Hospital of St. Mary Spital,
founded in 1197, in the parish of St. Botolph (Cunningham's <hi rend='italic'>Handbook of
London</hi>, p. 463).</note> either, I dare say! I don't mind letting
you know,</q> he continued, <q>now that I have you safe, that I am
acquainted with his residence, and that we are sure of having
him here in a day or two to keep you company. For when he
comes to London he puts up at that house, and then we shall
catch him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>John knew well that the house named was Father Garnett's
resort, and was in great distress to find that the secret had been
betrayed to the enemy; and, though kept as close as possible,
yet he managed in a few days by God's good providence
to get an opportunity of sending some little article <emph>wrapped
up in blank paper</emph> to a friend in London. His friend on
receiving it carefully smoothed out the paper and held it to
the fire, knowing that John would be likely to communicate by
the means of orange-juice if he had the opportunity, and there
he found it written that this residence of Father Garnett's had
been betrayed, and that Father Garnett must be warned of it.
This was instantly done, and in this way the Father was saved,
for otherwise he would assuredly, as Wade had said, have betaken
himself to that house in a day or two. Now, however, he not
only did not go, but took all his things away, so that when the
house was searched they found nothing. Had it not been for
this providential warning from our greatest enemy, they would
<pb n='cxliv'/><anchor id='Pgcxliv'/>
have found plenty; they would have found him, his books,
altar furniture, and other things of a similar nature. Father
Garnett, then, escaped this time by John's good help, as I had
done previously.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After his escape John came to me, but though I desired
much to keep him, it was out of the question, for he was now so
marked a man that his presence would have been a continual
danger for me and all my friends. For I was wont in the
country to go openly to the houses of Catholic gentlemen, and
it might well happen that John might come across persons that
knew him, and would know me through him. Whereas but very
few of the enemy knew me, for I was always detained in close
custody, and none but Catholics saw me in prison, nay, such
Catholics only as I knew to be specially trustworthy. I had,
indeed, been examined publicly in London several times, but the
persons concerned in the examinations very seldom left town,
and if they had done so I should have been warned of it instantly,
and should have taken good care never to trust myself in their
neighbourhood. So I put John with Father Garnett, to stay in
quiet hiding for a time; and when opportunity offered sent him
over to Father Persons, that he might obtain, what he had long
hoped for, admission to the Society. He was admitted at Rome,<note place='foot'>John Lilly entered the Society Feb. 2, 1602, æt. 37 (Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>,
p. 429).</note>
and lived there for six or seven years as a Lay-brother, much
esteemed, I believe, by everybody. I can on my part testify
about him to the greater glory of God, and that the more
allowably because I believe he has died in England before this
present writing, whither he returned with a consumption on him:
I can, I say, testify that for nearly six years that he was with me
in England, and had his hands full of business for me, though he
had to do with all sorts of men in all sorts of places (for while
I was engaged upstairs with the gentry and nobility, he was
associating downstairs with the servants, often very indifferent
characters), yet the whole of this time he so guarded his heart
and his soul that I never found him to have been even in danger
of mortal sin. Truly his was an innocent soul, and endowed
with great prudence and cleverness.</q>
</p>

<pb n='cxlv'/><anchor id='Pgcxlv'/>

<p>
<q>But now that I have brought the history of John Lilly to its
close, it is time to return to myself, who, having just escaped one
danger, had like to have fallen into a second and still greater one,
had not God again interposed His hand.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXIII.</head>

<p>
<q>I mentioned just now that one of my hostess' servants told a
friend of his, but an enemy of ours, that I habitually resided at
his mistress' house, and that at that particular time I was at such
a house in London. How this house was searched, and how
they seized my companion and my manuscripts, but missed me, I
have related. The Council, therefore, now knowing my residence
in the country, issued a commission to some Justices of the
Peace in that county to search this lady's house for a Priest. It
had, in fact, began to be talked of in the county that she had
taken this grand house in order that she might harbour Priests
there in larger numbers and with greater freedom, because it was
more private; and in this people were not far wrong.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now at this time, that is, soon after my return from London,
we had driven over to the new house to make arrangements for
our removal thither, and with the special object of determining
where to construct hiding-places. To this end we had Little
John with us, whom I have before mentioned as very clever at
constructing these places, and whom Father Garnett had lent to
us for a time for this purpose. Having made all the necessary
arrangements we left Little John behind, and Hugh Sheldon also
to help him, who is now at Rome with Father Persons in the
room of John Lilly. These two, whom we had always found
most faithful, were to construct the hiding-places, and to be the
only ones beside ourselves to know anything about them. The
rest of us, however, returned the same day to our hostess' own
house, and by the advice of one of the servants, God so disposing
it, we came back a different way, as being easier for the carriage.
Had we returned by the way we went, the searchers would have
come early to the house where we were, and most probably
catching us entirely unprepared, would have found what they
came to seek. The fact was that the road by which we went to
<pb n='cxlvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxlvi'/>
the new house ran through a town, where some of the enemy
were on the watch and had seen us pass, but not seeing us
return they concluded that we were spending the night at
the new house, and went there the first thing in the morning
to search.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But the house was so large that, although they had a
numerous body of followers, they were not able to surround it
entirely, nor to watch all the outlets so narrowly, but what Little
John managed to make off safely. Hugh Sheldon they caught,
but could get nothing out of him, so they sent him afterwards to
prison at Wisbech, and from thence later to some other prison
in company with many Priests, and at last in the same good
company into exile.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When, however, the Justices found that they were wrong,
and that the lady had returned home the previous day, they
retraced their steps and came as fast as their horses could carry
them to the old house. They arrived at our dinner-hour, and
being admitted by the carelessness of the porter, got into the hall
before we had any warning. Now as the lady of the house was
a little indisposed that morning, we were going to take our dinner
in my room, that is, Father Percy, myself, and Master Roger
Lee, who had come down from London to finish his retreat which
had been so rudely interrupted before. So when I heard who
had come, that they were in the great hall, and that his lordship
himself, who was indeed but a boy at that time, could not prevent
them from intruding into his room, though he was also unwell, I
made a pretty shrewd guess what they had come about, and
snatching up such things as wanted hiding I made the best of
my way to the hiding-place, together with Father Percy and
Master Roger Lee. For it would not do for this latter to have
been found here, especially as he had already been found in the
house in London where I was known to have been, and would
therefore have given good reason to think that I was here also.
But we had to pass by the door of the room in which the enemy
were as yet waiting, and exclaiming that they would wait no
longer. Nay, one of the pursuivants opened the door and
looked out; and some of the servants said that he must have
seen me as I passed. But God certainly interposed, for it was
<pb n='cxlvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxlvii'/>
surely not to be expected from natural causes that men who had
come eager to search the house at once, and were loudly
declaring they would do so, should stay in a room where they
were not locked in, just as long as was necessary for us to hide
ourselves, and then come forth as if they had been let loose,
intrude upon the lady of the house, and course through all the
rooms like bloodhounds after their prey. I cannot but think
that this was the finger of God, Who would not that the good
intentions of this lady should be so soon frustrated, but rather
wished by so evident a display of His providence to confirm
her in her determinations, and preserve her for many more
good works.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The authorities searched the house thoroughly the whole day,
but found nothing. At last they retired disappointed, and wrote
to the Council what they had done. We soon discovered who
had done the mischief (for he had not done it secretly) and
discharged him, but without unkindness. I gave out also that I
should quit the place altogether, and for a time we practised
particular caution in all points.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In consequence of this mishap it became impossible for us
to remove to the new house. For those same Justices, who were
pestilent heretics, and several others in the same county, Puritans,
declared they would never suffer her ladyship to live at peace if
she came there, as her only object was to harbour Priests. Being
deterred, therefore, from that place, but not from her design, she
set about fitting up her own present residence for that same
purpose, and built us separate quarters close to the old chapel,
which had been erected anciently by former Barons of the family
to hear Mass in when the weather might make it unpleasant to go
to the parish church. Here, then, she built a little wing of three
stories for Father Percy and me. The place was exceedingly
convenient, and so free from observation that from our rooms we
could step out into the private garden, and thence through
spacious walks into the fields, where we could mount our horses
and ride whither we would.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As we lived here safely and quietly, I frequently left Father
Percy at home, and made excursions to see if I could establish
similar centres of operation among other families; and in this
<pb n='cxlviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxlviii'/>
Father Roger Lee (to give him his present title) helped me not a
little. He first took me to the house of a relation of his, who
lived in princely splendour, and whose father was one of the
Queen's Council. This young nobleman was a schismatic, that is,
a Catholic by conviction, but conforming externally to the State
religion; and there seemed no hope of getting him any further,
for he contented himself with <foreign rend='italic'>velleities</foreign>, and was fearful of
offending his father. His wife, however, who was a heretic, had
begun to listen with interest to Catholic doctrine, so that there
was hope she might in time be brought into the Church. Their
house was full of heretic servants, and there was a constant
coming and going of heretic gentry either on business or on visit;
it was therefore imperatively necessary that, as I could only go
there publicly, I should well conceal my purpose.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We paid a visit, then, to this house, and were made very
welcome, Master Lee for his own sake, as being much beloved,
and I for his. On the first day I looked in vain for an opportunity
of a conversation with the lady of the house, for there was
always some one by. We were obliged to play at cards to pass
the time, as those are wont to do who know not the eternal value
of time, or at least care not for it. On the next day, however, as
the lady of the house stept aside once to the window to set her
watch, I joined her there, and after talking a little about the
watch, passed on to matters which I had more in view, saying I
wished we took as much pains to set our souls in order as we did
our watches. She looked up at me in pure surprise to hear such
things from my lips; and as I saw I might never get a better
opportunity than the present, I began to open a little further, and
told her that I had come there with Master Lee specially for her
sake, hearing from him that she took interest in matters of
religion, and that I was ready to explain the Catholic doctrine to
her, and satisfy all the doubts she could possibly have; moreover,
that I could point out the way to a height of virtue which she
had hitherto never dreamt of, for that in heresy she could neither
find that way, nor any who made account of it. She was struck
with what I said, and promised to find some opportunity for
further conversation, when we might speak more fully on the
matter. I gave her this hint of a higher virtue, because she had
<pb n='cxlix'/><anchor id='Pgcxlix'/>
been represented to me, as she really was, as a lady of most
earnest and conscientious character.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>She found the time according to her promise; all her
difficulties were removed, and she became a Catholic. After reconciling
her to the Church, I made some other converts in the same
house; then I recommended her a Catholic maid, and suggested
that she should keep a Priest always in the house, to which she
gladly assented. This was a thing that might easily be managed,
not indeed as it was in our house, where the whole household
was Catholic, and knew us to be Priests; but a Priest could well
live in the upper part of the house, from which all heretics might
be kept away, especially now that some of the servants were
Catholics. And, indeed, the accommodation was such that I do
not know any place in England where a Priest who wished to be
private could live more conveniently. For he could have, in
the first place, a fine room to himself, opening on a spacious
corridor of some eighty paces, which looked on a garden, the
laying out of which had cost, as I was told, ten thousand florins
[1,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>]; in this corridor, moreover, was a separate room, which
would serve excellently as a chapel, and another for his meals,
with fire-places and every convenience. It was a pity, I said,
that such a place had not a resident Priest, where the mistress
was a devout Catholic, and the master no enemy to religion.
Her husband, indeed, made no difficulty of receiving Priests;
nay, he sometimes came to hear me preach, and at last went so
far as to be fond of dressing the altar with his own hands, and of
saying the breviary: yet with all this he still remains outside the
ark, liable to be swept off by the waters of the deluge when they
break forth, for he presumes too much on an opportunity of
doing penance before death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The lady then readily fell in with my suggestion of having
a Priest in her house; so I brought thither Father Antony
Hoskins, a man of great ability, who had lately come over from
Spain, where he had spent ten years in the Society with remarkable
success in his studies. Being placed there, he did a great
deal of good on all sides, and remained with them almost up to
the present time, when at length he has been removed and put to
greater things. He did not, however, stay constantly at home, for
<pb n='cl'/><anchor id='Pgcl'/>
he is a man whom, when once known, many would wish to
confer with, so that he was forced to go about at times. At
present there is another Father in the house, a most devoted
man. But the lady directs herself chiefly by Father Percy, who
this very week addressed me a letter in the following words:&mdash;<q>Such
a one</q> (meaning this lady of whom I have been speaking)
<q>is going on very well. She has put her whole house under the
protection of our Blessed Lady of Loretto, and offers her heart
to her, to serve her and her Son for ever, with all that she
possesses; and in token of this she has had made a beautiful
heart of gold, which she wishes to send to Loretto by the first
opportunity. We desire, therefore, to hear from you by whom she
can send this offering.</q> Thus he writes about this lady. In this
way then, by the grace of God, was this house, with its domestic
church, established and confirmed in the Faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Master Roger also introduced me to some neighbours of
his; among others to a gentleman of the Queen's Court,</q><note place='foot'>In the margin of the MS. is written <q>Digbæus,</q> in the same hand as the
text.</note> Sir
Everard Digby, <q>who had inherited a large estate, and had
married a lady who was sole heiress to all her father's property,</q>
Mary Mulshaw, of Gothurst, in Buckinghamshire. <q rend='pre'>Not one of
this family was a Catholic, nor even inclined to the Catholic faith.
The wife's father, who was the head of the house, was a thorough
heretic, and had his thoughts entirely occupied in hoarding
money for his daughter, and increasing her revenues. His son-in-law
devoted himself wholly to juvenile sports. When in London,
he attended at Court, being one of the Queen's gentlemen
pensioners; but in the country he spent almost his whole time in
hunting and hawking. Hence it happened that Master Roger
Lee, who was a neighbour of his, and fond of similar sports,
often joined him on such occasions, and brought his falcons to
hawk in company. We two, therefore, took advantage of this
acquaintanceship, and I was introduced to this gentleman's house
as a friend and intimate of Master Lee's. We made frequent
visits there, and took every opportunity of speaking of Catholic
doctrine and practice. I took care, however, that Master Lee
should always speak more frequently and more earnestly than I,
<pb n='cli'/><anchor id='Pgcli'/>
that no suspicion might arise about my real character. Indeed, so
far was this gentleman from having the least suspicion about me,
that he seriously asked Master Lee whether he thought I was a
good match for his sister, whom he wished to see married well,
and to a Catholic, for he looked on Catholics as good and
honourable men.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We had, therefore, as I said, frequent converse on matters of
salvation; and the wife was the first to listen with any fruit, at
a time when she was living in the country but her husband was
up in town. Her parents were now dead, and she was mistress
of the house, so that we were able to deal more directly with her.
At last she came to the point of wishing to be a Catholic, and
told me she should be glad to speak with a Priest. I could
scarce forbear a smile at this. I answered, however, that the
thing might be managed, and that I would speak with Master
Lee on the subject. <q>In the meantime,</q> I added, <q>I can teach
you the way to examine your conscience, as I myself was
taught to do it by an experienced Priest.</q> So I told Master
Roger that as she was now determined and prepared, he might
inform her of my being a Priest. This he did, but she for
some time refused to believe it, saying, <q>How is it possible
he can be a Priest? Has he not lived among us rather as a
courtier? Has he not played at cards with my husband, and
played well too, which is impossible for those not accustomed
to the game? Has he not gone out hunting with my husband,
and frequently in my hearing spoken of the hunt and of the
hawks in proper terms, without tripping, which no one could but
one who has been trained to it?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Many other things she adduced to show I could not be a
Priest: to all of which Master Lee replied, <q>It is true that he
said and did what you say; and unless he had done so, how
could he have gained entrance here, and conversed with you, and
by his conversation brought you to the Faith? For if he had
presented himself as a Priest (which he would much prefer, were
it feasible), how would your father, who was then living, have
allowed his introduction, or you yourselves?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>She could not but admit the truth of this; yet she found it
hard to believe that it was so. <q>I pray you,</q> she said, <q>not to be
<pb n='clii'/><anchor id='Pgclii'/>
angry with me, if I ask further whether any other Catholic knows
him to be a Priest but you. Does so-and-so know him?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Yes,</q> he answered, <q>and goes to confession to him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then she mentioned other names, and at last that of my
hostess, who lived in the neighbourhood, but ten miles off.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Does she, too, know him as a Priest, and deal with him
as such?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Why,</q> said Master Lee, <q>she not only knows him as a
Priest, but has given herself, and all her household, and all that
she has, to be directed by him, and takes no other guide but
him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then at length she confessed herself satisfied.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You will find him, however,</q> added Master Lee, <q>quite a
different man when he has put off his present character.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This she acknowledged the next day, when she saw me in
my soutane and other priestly garments, such as she had never
before seen. She made a most careful confession, and came to
have so great an opinion of my poor powers, that she gave herself
entirely to my direction, meditated great things, which, indeed,
she carried out, and carries out still.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When this matter was thus happily terminated, we all three
consulted together, how we could induce her husband to enter
also into St. Peter's net. Now, it so happened that he had fallen
sick in London, and his wife on hearing it determined to go and
nurse him. We, however, went up before her, and, travelling
more expeditiously, had time to deal with him before she came.
I spoke to him of the uncertainty of life, and the certainty of
misery, not only in this life, but especially in the next, unless
we provided against it: and I showed him that we have here
no abiding city, but must look for one to come. As affliction
oftentimes brings sense, so it happened in his case; for we
found but little difficulty in gaining his goodwill. And as he
was a man of solid sense and excellent heart, he laid a firm
foundation from the beginning. He prepared himself well for
confession, after being taught the way; and when he learnt that I
was a Priest, he felt no such difficulty in believing as his wife had
done, because he had known similar cases; but he rather rejoiced
at having found a confessor who had experience among persons
<pb n='cliii'/><anchor id='Pgcliii'/>
of his rank of life, and with whom he could deal at all times
without danger of its being known that he was dealing with a
Priest. After his reconciliation, he began on his part to be
anxious about his wife, and wished to consult with us how best
to bring her to the Catholic religion. We both smiled at this,
but said nothing at that time, determining to wait till his wife
came up to town, that we might witness how each loving soul
would strive to win the other.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Certainly they were a favoured pair. Both gave themselves
wholly to God's service, and the husband afterwards sacrificed all
his property, his liberty, nay, even his life, for God's Church, as I
shall relate hereafter. For this was that Sir Everard Digby, Knight,
of whom later on I should have had to say many things, if so
much had not been already written and published about him and
his companions. But never in any of these writings has justice
been done to the sincerity of his intention, nor the circumstances
properly set forth which would put his conduct in its true light.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After this they both came to see me at my residence in the
country. But while there he was again taken ill, and that so
violently and dangerously, that all the Oxford doctors despaired
of his life. As, therefore, in all likelihood he had not long to
live, he began to prepare himself earnestly for a good death, and
his wife to think of a more perfect way of life. For some days
she gave herself to learn the method of meditation, and to find
out God's will with regard to her future life, how she might best
direct it to His glory. To be brief, she came to this determination,
that if her husband should die, she would devote herself
entirely to good works, observe perpetual chastity and exact
obedience; that as for her property, which would be very extensive
as they were without children, she would spend it all in pious
uses according to my direction; she would herself live where and
in what style I judged best for the advancement of God's honour
and the good of her own soul; and she added that her desire was
to wear poor clothing wherever she might be, and observe all
the rules of poverty. All this was to be while the persecution
might last in England. If, however, it should cease, and England
should become Catholic, then she would give her house (a very
large and fine one), and all the property her father left her, for
<pb n='cliv'/><anchor id='Pgcliv'/>
the foundation of a College of the Society: and this would have
been amply sufficient for a first-rate foundation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This was her resolution, but God had otherwise arranged,
and for that time happily. For when all the Oxford doctors gave
up Sir Everard's case as hopeless, I, who loved him much, did
not lose heart, but without his knowledge I sent for a certain
Cambridge doctor, a Catholic, and a man of much learning and
experience, whom I had known to cure cases abandoned by other
physicians. On his arrival at our house, where Sir Everard Digby
then was with his wife, after telling him all about the patient, I
got him to examine the sick man himself, and learn from him all
about his habit of body and general constitution. Then I asked
him if he thought there was any hope. He answered, <q>If Sir
Everard will venture to put himself entirely in my hands, I have
good hopes, with the help of God, of bringing him round.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The patient on hearing this said to me, <q>Since this doctor is
known to your Reverence, and is chosen by you, I give myself
willingly into his hands.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>By this doctor, then, he was cured beyond all expectation,
and so completely restored to perfect health that there was not a
more robust or stalwart man in a thousand. He was a most
devoted friend to me, just as if he had been my twin-brother.
And this name of brother we always used in writing to each other.
How greatly he was attached me, may be seen from the following
incident. Once when I had gone to a certain house to assist a
soul in agony, he got to learn that I was in great danger there:
upon this he at first expressed a terrible distress, and then immediately
said to his wife that if I should be taken, he was resolved
to watch the roads by which I should be carried prisoner to
London, and take with him a sufficient number of friends and
servants to rescue me by force from those who had me in custody;
and if he should miss me on the road, he would accomplish my
release one way or another, even though he should spend his
whole fortune in the venture. Such, then, was his attachment to
me at that time, and this he retained always in the same&mdash;nay,
rather in an increased&mdash;degree to the end of his life; as he
showed by the way he spoke of me when pleading for his life
before the public court. At this time, however, as I said, he was
<pb n='clv'/><anchor id='Pgclv'/>
restored to health; and he and his wife got together a little
domestic church after the pattern of that in our own house, and
built a chapel with a sacristy, furnishing it with costly and
beautiful vestments, and obtained a Priest of the Society for
their chaplain, who remained with them to Sir Everard's death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What was done by this family was done by others also. For
many of the Catholic gentry coming to our house, and seeing the
arrangements and manner of life, followed the example themselves,
establishing a sort of congregation in each of their houses,
providing handsome altar furniture, making convenient arrangements
for the residence of Priests, and showing especial respect
and reverence to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Among those who came to this determination was a certain
lady resident near Oxford, whose husband was indeed a Catholic,
but overmuch devoted to worldly pursuits. She, however, gave
herself to be directed by me as far as she could, having such a
husband. I often visited them, and was always welcomed by
both; and there I established one of our Fathers, Edward
Walpole, whom I mentioned at an early part of this narrative as
having left a large patrimony for the sake of following Christ our
Lord, in the first year of my residence in England.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There was another lady also who had a similar wish: she
was a relative of my hostess, and she also resided in the county
of Oxford. Her husband was a Knight of very large property,
who hoped to be created a Baron, and still hopes for it. This
lady came on a visit to our house, and wished to learn the way
of meditating, which I taught her; but as her husband was a
heretic, it was impossible for her to have a Priest in her house,
as she greatly wished. She took, however, the resolution of
supporting a Priest, who should come to her at convenient times.
She resolved, also, to make a meditation every day, and to give
one or two hours daily to spiritual reading, when she had no
guests in the house. On her coming to me every six months, I
found that she had never omitted her meditation, nor her daily
examination of conscience, except on one occasion when her
husband insisted on her staying with the guests. Yet she had a
large and busy household to superintend, and a continual coming
and going of guests.</q>
</p>

<pb n='clvi'/><anchor id='Pgclvi'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It happened on one occasion when I was in this lady's
house, and was sitting with her after dinner, the servants having
gone down to get their own dinner, that suddenly a guest was
shown up who had just arrived. This was an Oxford Doctor
of Divinity, a heretic of some note and a persecutor of Catholics;
his name was Dr. Abbot.<note place='foot'>George Abbot was appointed Dean of Winton in 1559, in 1609 Bishop
of Lichfield and Coventry, from which in about a month he was translated to
London, and thence in 1611 to Canterbury. In July, 1621, as he was shooting
at a deer with a cross-bow, he shot the keeper, for which King James gave
him a dispensation. In 1627 he was sequestered from his office, and his
metropolitan jurisdiction put into commission, but about a year after he was
restored. He died at Croydon, Aug. 4, 1633, æt. 71.</note> He had just before this published
a book against Father Southwell, who had been executed, and
Father Gerard, who had escaped from the Tower, because these
two had defended the doctrine of equivocation, which he chose
to impugn. After this publication, the good man had been made
Dean of Winchester, a post which brought him in a yearly income
of eight thousand florins [800<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>]. This man then, as I said,
was shown up, and entered the dining-room, dressed in a sort
of silk soutane coming down to his knees, as is the manner of
their chief ministers. We were in appearance sitting at cards,
though when the servants had all left the room we had laid the
cards down to attend to better things. Hearing, however, this
gentleman announced, we resumed our game, so that he found
us playing, with a good sum of money on the table.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I may here mention, that when I played thus with Catholics,
with the view of maintaining among a mixed company the
character in which I appeared, I always agreed that each one
should have his money back afterwards, but should say an <hi rend='italic'>Ave
Maria</hi> for each piece that was returned to him. It was on these
terms that I frequently played with my brother Digby and other
Catholics, where it appeared necessary, so that the by-standers
thought we were playing for money, and were in hot earnest
over it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So also this minister never conceived the slightest suspicion
of me, but after the first courtesies began to talk at a pretty pace:
for this is the only thing those chattering ministers can do, who
possess no solid knowledge, but by the persuasive words of
<pb n='clvii'/><anchor id='Pgclvii'/>
human wisdom lead souls astray, and subvert houses, teaching
things that are not convenient. So he, after much frivolous talk,
began to tell us the latest news from London; how a certain
Puritan had thrown himself down from the steeple of a church,
having left it in writing that he knew himself to be secure of
his eternal salvation. About this writing, however, the learned
Doctor said nothing, but I had heard the particulars myself from
another quarter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Wretched man!</q> said I; <q>what could induce him thus to
destroy body and soul by one and the same act!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Sir,</q> said the Doctor, learnedly enough and magisterially,
<q>we must not judge any man.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>True,</q> I replied; <q>it is just possible that, as he was falling,
he repented of his sin: <hi rend='italic'>inter pontem et fontem</hi>, as they say. But
this is extremely improbable; since the last act of the man of
which we have any means of judging was a mortal sin and
deserving of damnation.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But,</q> said the Doctor, <q>we cannot know whether this was
such a sin.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Nay,</q> I replied, <q>this is not left to our judgment; it is
God's own verdict, when He forbids us under pain of hell to
kill any one: a prohibition which applies especially to the killing
of ourselves, for charity begins from oneself.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The good Doctor being here caught, said no more on this
point, but turned the subject, and said, smiling, <q>Gentlemen
must not dispute on theological matters.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>True,</q> said I, <q>we do not make profession of knowing
theology; but at least we ought to know the law of God, though
our profession is to play at cards.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The lady with whom I was playing, hearing him speak to
me in this way, could scarce keep her countenance, thinking
within herself what he would have said if he had known who
it was he was answering. The Doctor, however, did not stay
much longer. Whether he departed sooner than he at first
intended, I know not; but I know that we much preferred his
room to his company.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='clviii'/><anchor id='Pgclviii'/>

<div>
<head>XXIV.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I must now return to London, and relate what happened after
John Lilly was taken, and the gentleman imprisoned with whom
I rented my London house. This house being now closed to
me, I sought out another, but on a different plan. I did not
now join in partnership with any one, because I was unwilling
to be in the house of one known to be a Catholic. I managed
that this new house should be hired by a nephew of Master
Roger Lee, whom with his wife I had reconciled to the Catholic
Church; and, as he was not known to be a Catholic, the house
was entirely free from all suspicion. I had the use of this house
for three years, and during that time it was not once searched;
nor even before the Queen's death, though there were many
general searches made, and the prisons were choked with
Catholics, did they ever come to this house.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I had a man to keep the house who was a schismatic, but
otherwise an honest and upright person. When I was in residence,
this man provided me with necessaries; and when I was
away, he managed any business for me according to my written
directions. In all appearance he was the servant of the gentleman
who owned the house, and so he was esteemed and called
by the neighbours; and since, as a schismatic, he frequented
their churches, they entertained no suspicion of him, nor of the
house.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For myself, when I came to town, I always entered the
house after dark, and in summer time scarce ever went out while
I remained there. But my friends would come to visit me by
ones and twos on different days, that no special attention might
be drawn to the house from the number of visitors. Nor did
they ever bring any servants with them, though some were of
very high rank, and usually went about with a large number of
attendants. By these means I provided better for them and for
myself, and was able to continue longer in this way of life....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>When I was in London I did not allow every one to come
to my house whose desire to converse with me I was willing to
gratify; but I would sometimes, especially after dark in winter
time, go myself to their houses. On one occasion I was asked
<pb n='clix'/><anchor id='Pgclix'/>
by a certain lady to her house to hear the confession of a young
nobleman attached to the Court, who was a dear friend of her
husband's. Her husband was also a Catholic and well known
to me: though quite a young man, he had been one of the
principal captains in the Irish war. And the young nobleman
just mentioned was a Baron, and son to an Irish Earl, and at this
present writing he has himself succeeded to the earldom on his
father's death.<note place='foot'>Richard de Burgh, commonly called Richard of Kinsale, from his conduct
at that place, Baron of Dunkellin, succeeded his father as fourth Earl of
Clanricarde, May 20, 1601. He was subsequently made Earl of St. Albans,
and died Nov. 12, 1635. He married Frances, daughter and heiress of Sir
Francis Walsyngham, Knight, widow of Robert second Earl of Essex. She
died in 1632. Thus Walsyngham's only child became a Catholic.</note> This young Baron, then,</q> Lord Dunkellin,
<q rend='pre'>wished to make his confession to me. As I had not known
him before, I put a few questions to him, according to my
wont, beforehand. I asked him, therefore, if he was prepared
at once. He answered that he was. I then asked how often in
the year he was accustomed to go to the Sacraments. <q>Twice
or thrice in the year,</q> he said.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>It would be better,</q> said I, <q>to come more frequently, and
then less preparation would be necessary. As it is, I should
advise you to take a few days for the exact and diligent examination
of your conscience, according to the method that I will
show you; then you will come with greater fruit, and with greater
satisfaction to yourself and to me. And for the future I would
recommend a more frequent use of the holy Sacraments.</q> And I
brought some reasons for my advice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He listened to me very patiently, and when I had finished
he replied, <q>I will do in future what you recommend, and I
would willingly follow your counsel at present, if it were possible;
it is, however, impossible to put off my present confession.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Why is it impossible?</q> I asked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Because,</q> he replied, <q>to-morrow I shall be in circumstances
of danger, and I desire to prepare myself by confession to-day.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What danger is this,</q> I asked again, <q>to which you will be
exposed?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>There is a gentleman at Court,</q> he said, <q>who has
grievously insulted me, so that I was compelled in defence of
<pb n='clx'/><anchor id='Pgclx'/>
my honour to challenge him to single combat, and we meet
to-morrow at an appointed spot at some distance from town.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>My lord,</q> I exclaimed, <q>to approach the Sacrament in such
a frame of mind is not to prepare yourself for danger, nor to
cleanse your soul (though I doubt not it was with a good
intention you proposed it), but rather to sully your soul more
than ever, to affront God still further, and render Him still more
your enemy. For to come to confession with a determination of
taking vengeance is to put an obstacle to the grace of the Sacrament;
and, moreover, this particular action on which you are
resolved is not only a sin, but is visited with excommunication.
I urge you, therefore, to give up this intention; you will be able
to preserve your honour by some other way. Nay, the honour
you think to preserve by this is not real honour, but merely the
estimation of bad men founded on bad principles: men who
exalt their own worldly ideas above the law and honour of God.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>It is impossible to withdraw now,</q> he said, <q>for the thing
is known to many, and has been taken even to the Queen, who
has expressly forbidden us to pursue the matter any further.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Well then,</q> said I, <q>you have the best possible reason for
laying aside the quarrel, namely, obedience to the Queen's
behest. Moreover, you must remember that you are known
for the intimate friend of the Earl of Essex, and that, if you
overcome your adversary, the Queen (if it be only to spite the
Earl) will certainly visit you with some heavy punishment for
having disregarded her commands; but if you should kill him,
unquestionably she will take your life. On the other hand, if
you should be vanquished, what becomes of the honour you wish
to defend, and if you should be slain in that state of soul in
which you go to the fight, you go straight to eternal fire and
everlasting shame, for while you are defending your body from
your adversary's sword, you forget to parry the mortal thrust that
the devil is aiming at your soul.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But spite of all I could say, the fear of the world, which is
fatally powerful with men of this rank, prevailed, and his reply
was, <q>I implore you, Father, to pray for me, and to hear my
confession if you possibly can.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Certainly I cannot hear you,</q> I said, <q>for that honour
<pb n='clxi'/><anchor id='Pgclxi'/>
which you worship is not necessary to you, in the sense in
which it is to those who are obliged to take their part in a war.
Besides, you are the challenger, and you took this unlawful
course when it was possible for you to follow some other method
of vindicating yourself, and so whatever necessity there is for
pursuing the matter has been created by yourself. But this is
what I will do; I will give you from my reliquary a particle of
the Holy Cross, inclosed with an Agnus Dei, and you shall wear
it upon you. Perhaps God may have mercy upon you for the
sake of this, and afford you time for penance. Understand,
however, I do not give it you in order to encourage you in your
bad purpose, but that you may wear it with all reverence and
respect, so that, should you come into danger (which certainly I
do not desire), God may be moved to preserve your life, in the
consideration of the good will you have of honouring His Cross.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He took my gift very thankfully and reverentially, and had
it sewed inside his shirt over his heart, for it was arranged that
they should fight in their shirts without cuirass. It happened,
God so allowing it, that his adversary made a lunge at his heart
and pierced his shirt, but did not touch his skin. He on his side
wounded and prostrated his enemy, then gave him his life and
came off victorious. He then came to me in high spirits, and
told me how he had been preserved by the power of the Holy
Cross; then he thanked me very earnestly, and promised to be
more on his guard in future. The Queen soon after took a fancy
to this young nobleman, and kept him close to her at Court for a
time. But tiring soon of this sort of life, at his father's death he
married the widow of the Earl of Essex. She was a heretic when
he married her, but he soon made her a Catholic, and they both
live now as Catholics in Ireland, as I hear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>That Knight, moreover, who introduced this young Baron
to me, followed my counsel at that time, and after devoting
several days to a diligent examination of conscience, made a
general confession of his whole life, with a view of reforming it
for the future. A little later he was desirous of returning to the
Irish wars, but as I was in doubt whether this was lawful in
conscience, he promised me to resign his appointment and
return to England, if the Priests there, to whom I referred him
<pb n='clxii'/><anchor id='Pgclxii'/>
as living on the spot, and therefore having a closer knowledge of
the circumstances, decided that it was unlawful. Soon after his
arrival in Ireland, in a certain fight, while he was bravely
mounting a wall and animating his men to follow, he was
struck dead by a musket-ball. He had, however, before the
fight, carefully written me a letter and sent it off, informing me
that he had consulted the Priests in the country, and had
received this answer, that it was lawful to fight against the
Catholic party, because it was not clear to all why they had
taken up arms.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>After his death a remarkable incident occurred, which I will
relate. His wife, pious soul, who never had the least idea of her
husband's death, about that time heard every night some one
knocking at her chamber door, and that so loudly as to wake her.
Her maids heard it too, but on opening the door there was no
one to be seen. She therefore got a Priest to stay with her and
her maids till the usual time of the knocking, and when the same
noise and knocking at the door were heard, the Priest himself
went to the door, but found no one. This knocking went on till
such time as news of her husband's death reached her, as if it had
been a warning from his Angel to pray for his soul....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Having held this house for three years, I let it to a Catholic
friend, and took another house near the principal street in
London, called the Strand. Since most of my friends lived in
that street, they were thus able to visit me more easily, and I
them. After my removal I discovered how entirely free from
suspicion was the house which I had left, and in which I had
dwelt for three years; for the servant who kept my house sent
for a gardener with whom he had been acquainted in the other
house (for the garden of the new house needed to be put in
order), and the gardener remarked to him, <q>Some Papists have
come to live in your old house:</q> as though they who had
previously dwelt there had been good Protestants.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This new house was very suitable and convenient, and had
private entrances on both sides, and I had contrived in it some
most excellent hiding-places; and there I should long have
remained, free from all peril or even suspicion, if some friends of
mine, while I was absent from London, had not availed themselves
<pb n='clxiii'/><anchor id='Pgclxiii'/>
of the house rather rashly. It remained, however, in the
same state up to the time of the great and terrible disturbance of
the Powder Plot, as I shall hereafter shortly mention.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Meantime my friends brought me another who was heir to a
barony, and is himself now a peer, and by God's grace I
persuaded him to take on his shoulders the yoke of the law of
Christ and of the Catholic faith, and made him a member of the
Church. Another whom I had previously known in the world,
and had seen to be wholly devoted to every kind of vanity, fell
sick. He had abounded with riches and pleasures, and passed
his days in jollity, destined, however, to fall from thence in a
moment, had not God patiently waited, and in a suitable time led
him to penance. He then was lying sick of a grievous illness,
but yet had not begun to think of death. I heard that he was
sick, and obtained an entry into his chamber at eleven o'clock at
night, after the departure of his friends. He recognized me, and
was pleased at my visit. I explained why I had come, and
warned him to think seriously of the state of his soul, and,
instead of a Judge, render God a Friend and most loving Father,
however much he might have wasted all his substance. So then
weakness of body opened the ears of his heart, and in an
acceptable time God heard us, and in the day of salvation helped
us; insomuch that he offered himself as at once ready to make
his confession. I, however, said I would return on the following
night, and advised him meantime to procure that there should be
read to him, by a friend whom I named, Father Lewis of Grenada's
<hi rend='italic'>Explanation of the Commandments</hi>: that after each Commandment
he should occupy some little time in reflection, and call to mind
how, and how often, he had offended against that Commandment;
that he should then make an act of sorrow regarding each, and so
go on to the next. He promised that he would do so, and I
promised that I would return on the following night. This I did,
and heard his confession; I gave him all the assistance I could,
for the time had been short, especially for a sick man, to prepare
for such a confession, but he dared no longer defer it, although
he still seemed tolerably strong. I advised him to use the utmost
care in discharging all his debts, which were great, through the
extravagant expenditure in which he had indulged; I also
<pb n='clxiv'/><anchor id='Pgclxiv'/>
exhorted him to redeem his sins by alms. He did both by the
will he made the following day, and bequeathed a large sum for
pious uses, which, as I heard, was honestly paid.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I also bade him prepare for the Holy Communion and
Extreme Unction against the following night, and to have some
pious book read to him meantime. He not only did what I
advised, but exhorted all that came to visit him on the following
day, to repent at once of their former life, and not defer their
amendment as he had done: <q>Do not,</q> he said, <q>look for the
mercy which I have found, for this is to be presumptuous and
to irritate God; for I have deserved hell a thousand times on this
account.</q> And much more to the same effect did he speak, with
so much earnestness and freedom, that all marvelled at so sudden
a change. They asked him to hide the cross which he had
hanging from his neck (for I had lent him my own cross full of
relics to kiss, and exercise acts of reverence and love); but he
answered, <q>Hide it! Nay, I would not hide it, even if the most
bitter heretics were here. Too long have I refrained from
profession of the Catholic faith, and now, if God gave me life, I
would publicly profess myself a Catholic:</q> so that all marvelled
and were much edified and moved at his words. He spoke thus
to all the peers and great men that visited him. His conversion
thus became publicly known, and many of the courtiers afterwards
spoke of it. On the third night of my visiting him according to
my promise, he again made his confession with great expressions
of sorrow, and begged for the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, and
when he received it, himself arranged for me more conveniently
to reach the different parts of his body, just as though he had
been a Catholic many years. Seeing him in such good disposition,
I asked him whether he did not put all his trust in the merits of
Christ and in the mercy of God. <q>Surely!</q> said he; <q>did I not
do so, and did not that mercy give me salvation, I should have
been condemned to the pit of hell; in myself I find no ground of
hope, but rather of trembling. But I feel great hope in the mercy
and goodness of God, Who has so long waited for me, and now
has called me when I deserved, aye, and thought of, anything
but this!</q> Then he took my hand and said, <q>Father, I cannot
express how much I am indebted to you, for you were sent by
<pb n='clxv'/><anchor id='Pgclxv'/>
God to give me this happiness.</q> I found, moreover, that he had
no temptation against faith, but most firmly believed and confessed
every point, and I saw most clearly that God had poured
into his soul the habits of many virtues. Then I erected an altar
in his chamber with the ornaments which I had brought, and I
said Mass, while he assisted with great devotion and comfort. I
afterwards gave him the Viaticum, which he received with the
utmost reverence. When I had finished everything, I gave him
some advice that would be useful should he fall into his agony
before my return, and I left him full of consolation. Now, see
the providence of God: but a few hours after my departure, as he
was persevering in petitions for mercy, and in acts of thanksgiving
for the mercy he had received, he rendered up his soul to God.
But before his death, he asked the by-standers whether certain
purple and red robes could be applied to the use of the altar,
which he had received from the King when he was created a
Knight of the Order of the Bath. The investiture of this order
takes place only at the coronation of the King, and the Knights
enjoy precedence before all other Knights except those of the
most noble Order of the Garter, almost all of whom are Earls or
other peers. He, however, was a Knight of the Bath, and he
wished that the robes with which he had been invested at the
coronation should be devoted to the use of the altar; for he said
that he had derived great comfort from seeing my vestments,
which were merely light and portable, but yet handsome, of red
silk embroidered with silver lace. So after his death they gave me
his suit of the peculiar robes of that order, and out of them I
made sets of vestments of two colours, one of which the College
of St. Omers still possesses. Thus is the pious desire of the
deceased fulfilled, in whose conversion I could not fail to see
God's great goodness and providence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>About the same time I received into the Church a lady, the
wife of a certain Knight, who is at the present day a very good
and useful friend of our Fathers. Her husband was at this time
a heretic, but his brother had been brought by me, through the
Spiritual Exercises, to despise the world and follow the counsels
of Christ. He introduced me to his sister, and after one or two
interviews she embraced the Catholic faith, although she was
<pb n='clxvi'/><anchor id='Pgclxvi'/>
well assured that she would incur great losses as soon as it should
become known to her husband, as in truth it came to pass. For
he first tried caresses, then threats, and left no means unemployed
to shake her resolution, insomuch that for a long time she had
nothing to expect or hope but to be separated from her husband,
and stripped of all the goods of the world, that so in patience
she might possess her soul. When her husband was on her
account deprived of the public employment which he held, she
bore it with great fortitude, and remained ever constant and even
in mind. At length, by her virtue and her patience, she rendered
her husband a friend to Catholics, and afterwards himself a
Catholic. He was reconciled by the ministry of Father Walpole,
to whom I had recommended her on my leaving England.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There were many other conversions, which I cannot mention
separately, for I have already carried to too great length the
narrative of these events, which are truly very insignificant if
they are compared with the actions of others.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXV.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One case more I cannot pass over, which gave me especial
pleasure for the sake of the person concerned; for I do not
know that any one was ever more dear to me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sir Everard Digby, of whom I have spoken above, had
a friend for whom he felt a peculiar affection. He had often
recommended him to me, and was anxious to give me an
opportunity of making his acquaintance and gaining him over,
if it possibly might be; but because he held an office in the
Court, requiring daily attendance about the King's person, so
that he could not be absent for long together, our desire was
long delayed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At last Sir Everard met his friend, while we were both
together in London; and he took an opportunity of asking
him to come at a certain time to his chamber, to play at cards,
for these are the books gentlemen in London study both night
and day. He promised to come, and on his arrival he did
not find a party at play, but only us two sitting and conversing
very seriously; so Sir Everard asked him to sit down a little,
until the rest should arrive. Then, in an interval of silence,
<pb n='clxvii'/><anchor id='Pgclxvii'/>
Sir Everard said, <q>We two were engaged in a very serious
conversation, in fact, concerning religion. You know,</q> he said,
addressing the visitor, <q>that I am friendly to Catholics and to
the Catholic faith; I was, nevertheless, disputing with this gentleman,
who is a friend of mine, against the Catholic faith,
in order to see what defence he could make; for he is an earnest
Catholic, as I do not hesitate to tell you.</q> Then, turning to
me, he begged me not to be vexed that he betrayed me to a
stranger. <q>And I must say,</q> he continued, <q>he so well defended
the Catholic faith that I could not answer him, and I am glad
that you have come to help me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The visitor was young and confident, and trusting in his
own great abilities, expected to carry everything before him, so
good was his cause and so lightly did he esteem me, as he
afterwards confessed. So he began to allege many objections
to the arguments before used. I waited with patience until he
ceased speaking, and then answered in few words. He urged
his points, and so we argued one against the other for a short
hour's space. Afterwards I began to explain my view more fully,
and to confirm it with texts of Holy Scripture and passages from
the Fathers, and with such reasons as came to my mind. And
I felt, as I often did, God supplying me words as I spoke on
His behalf in great might, not for the sake of me that spoke, nor
for any desert of mine, but just as He gives milk to a mother
when she has an infant who needs to be fed with milk. My
young friend was of a docile nature, and could no way bear to
speak against the truth when he saw it; so that he listened in
silence, and God was meantime speaking to his heart with a
voice far more powerful and efficacious. God, too, gave him
ears to hear, so that the word fell not upon stony ground, nor
among thorns, but into good soil, yea, very good, that yielded
by God's grace a hundred-fold in its season. So before he left,
he was fully resolved to become a Catholic, and took with him
a book to assist him in preparing for a good confession, which
he made before a week had passed. And from that time it was
not enough for him to walk in the ordinary path of God's
commandments, but God prepared him for higher things; and
whatever counsels I gave him he received with eagerness, and
<pb n='clxviii'/><anchor id='Pgclxviii'/>
retained not only in a faithful memory, but in a most ready will.
He began to use the daily examination of conscience, and even
learned the method of meditation, and made a meditation every
day. He was forced to rise very early to do this before he went
to the King, which in summer was at break of day, for the King
went hunting every day, and he, by duty of his office, was
necessarily present at the royal breakfast. He would, moreover,
so with his whole soul devour pious books, that he always had
one in his pocket; and in the King's Court and in the Presence-chamber,
while courtiers and ladies were standing around, you
might see him turn himself to a window, and there read a chapter
of Thomas à Kempis' <hi rend='italic'>Imitation of Christ</hi>, a book with which
he was most intimate; and after he had read it, you might see
him turn in body, but not in mind, towards the others, for there
he would stand rapt in thought, while the rest perhaps were
supposing that he was admiring the beauty of some lady, or
thinking over the means to climb to great honours. In truth,
he had no need to take particular pains about this, for, in the
first place, he was son and brother to an Earl, and, moreover,
the place and office which he filled were very honourable, giving
him the ear of the King every day. His wit could not fail to
distinguish favourable opportunities for gaining his requests, and,
in fact, the King had given him an office which he afterwards
sold, but which, had he kept it, would have brought him in more
than ten thousand florins [1,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] a year. In short, such was his
position that he would undoubtedly have soon risen to great
honours; for he made himself acceptable to all, and was not
a little beloved, insomuch that after he had left the Court and
given up all hope of worldly honour, I heard it said by some
persons of the greatest eminence and experience in the ways of
the Court, that they had never in forty years' space known any
one so highly valued and beloved in every quarter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, what is far more important, he was beloved in the
Court of the King of Kings, and inspired to desire and seek after
greater and more abiding blessings. So he conceived the wish
of trying the Spiritual Exercises, in the course of which he
determined to desert the Court, and devote himself to those
pursuits which would render him most pleasing to God and
<pb n='clxix'/><anchor id='Pgclxix'/>
most profitable to his neighbour; so with as little delay as
possible he made such a disposition of his goods as would
enable him freely to make his escape from England. He then,
to the surprise of all, asked and obtained the King's leave to
go to Italy, where he still resides, and he is so well known to
our Fathers that there is no need to write anything more concerning
him; but this I can say, that wherever I have known
him to have been, he has left men filled with great esteem for
him, and expectation of yet greater things....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The conversions which took place in the country were not
few, and some were cases of heads of families; but I have already
gone to great length, and I will here recount one only, the
beginning and end of which I saw to be good.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There was a lady, a kinswoman of my hostess, whose
husband had now many years been a Catholic, yet neither her
husband, nor any of her friends, nor my hostess herself, who
loved her as a sister, could ever lead her to become a Catholic.
She did not object to listen to Catholics, even to Priests, and was
fond of earnest argument with them; but she would believe no
one but herself, and indeed her talents were greater than I have
often met with in a woman. My hostess often mourned over this
lady, and grieved that no remedy could be found; she wished
that I should once see her. She spoke highly in praise of her
talents and amiable disposition, and of her life and behaviour in
all respects, with the one solitary exception of her being an
obstinate heretic. I asked my hostess, therefore, to invite her
to pay us a visit, although she lived in a distant county. She
came according to the invitation, and we took care that she
should find me showing myself in public, and dressed as though
I had been a guest just arrived from London. On the first two
days we did but little, for we knew that she would have plenty of
time afterwards, and I wished to remove all timidity from her;
for though she had been accustomed to meet Priests at that
house, yet they had kept mostly to their chambers. But as soon
as I judged her to be convinced that I was a Catholic, but not a
Priest, I began slowly to turn my conversation with her often
upon religion. At first I spoke little, but to such purpose that
she could not answer me; and so I left her, not urging her, but
<pb n='clxx'/><anchor id='Pgclxx'/>
rather leaving her with a desire to hear more. At length, after a
few days, I judged her thoroughly prepared, and I arranged that
my hostess should begin to talk seriously upon these topics, and
that when she saw me enter into the conversation and carry it on,
she should leave us in company with one or two of the lady's
daughters, for she had brought three with her. This having been
done, we began the combat with, as it seemed to her, various
success, for one or two hours; and then she listened to me as I
spoke without interruption for two or three hours more. She
spoke little in answer, and did not like on the spot to acknowledge
herself vanquished, but she thanked me heartily, and went
away quite red and flushed in the face. She was truly moved, or,
rather, changed interiorly, and straightway she ran to my hostess
and said, <q>Oh, cousin, what have you done?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What have I done?</q> replied the other.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Oh, who is it,</q> she rejoined, <q>that you introduced me to? Is
he such a one as you represented to me? At any rate, he is,</q> ...
and she spoke in much higher terms of my learning and language
than I deserved, and she added that she could not resist what I
urged, nor answer it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the following day God confirmed what He had wrought
in her, and she surrendered at discretion, and accepted a book to
help her to prepare for confession. Meantime, with the mother's
consent and assistance, I instructed her three daughters, and
when they had learned the catechism, I heard their confessions.
The mother, however, during the time of her preparation, began
to be filled with trouble and sorrow, not on account of leaving
her heresy, but through fear of confession. I, on the contrary,
encouraged her to persevere, and adduced arguments against her
timidity, but I could not rid her of it, and so, seeing that she was
ready as far as examination was concerned, but nevertheless put
the matter off from day to day, and begged a little more time to
prepare, I would not consent. I told her that this came from the
enemy, who grieved to leave his habitation, and at length she saw
and acknowledged this. For as soon as out of obedience she had
made her confession, she felt relieved of a great burden, and
filled with consolation; and she told me that now she was glad
not to have delayed longer.</q>
</p>

<pb n='clxxi'/><anchor id='Pgclxxi'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have often found this, that some souls experience great
trouble when first they make confession on being reconciled to
the Church of God. Some persons even fall sick and faint, so as
to be forced to cease speaking for a time and sit down, until they
have recovered a little and are able to continue; and this has
happened even when at their first coming they were in sound
health, and ready to confess. And then when they recommenced,
they again fell ill, and this happened two or three times in the
course of their first confession. But when the confession was
finished, they not only felt no sickness, but having received
absolution, they went away full of joy and consolation. Some, in
fact, have remarked to me, that did men but know what consolation
is gained in confession, they would never be deprived of
so great a happiness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Among these was to be reckoned this lady, who came forth
from confession full of consolation, and gave most hearty thanks
to her cousin, for that by her means she had been admitted to
share in so great a happiness. So great was God's mercy towards
her, that thenceforth she gave herself wholly up to devotion. On
her return home she devoted herself to making handsome vestments,
and, whenever she was able, she procured the company of
Priests. And not content with this, she was anxious to return
wholly to our house, and to dwell with us, in order to have more
frequent access to the Sacraments, and the opportunity of hearing
the public and private exhortations that we had every Sunday and
Festival-day. She stayed with us about two years, and all that
time she gave herself up to devotion and the constant reading of
pious books. She was clearly led to this course of life by the
special mercy and providence of God; for at the end of the
period I have mentioned, although she seemed stout and strong,
she was suddenly attacked with disease, by which, within a few
days, she was so weakened, that no skill of the physicians could
restore her strength. She was warned to prepare for the life to
come, and she repeated a good and careful confession of her
whole life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At length, finding herself in her last agony, she wished to
write a letter to her brother, who was a heretic, and almost the
greatest enemy the Catholics had in the county in which he
<pb n='clxxii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxii'/>
dwelt. To him, then, she wished to send a letter, written by her
daughter's hand, but subscribed with her own, to the following
effect: That he knew she had long been a strenuous upholder of
this new religion, so that he might be the more convinced that
she would not have changed it without good grounds, and that
she had certain and unanswerable authorities for the faith which
she had adopted; wherefore she protested to him that ever since
the time when she embraced the faith she had lived in peace of
conscience, and that never before that time had she enjoyed true
internal consolation; finally, she begged him to have a care of
his soul, and proceeded thus: <q>I, your sister, now at the point of
death, by these my last words, beg and beseech you to embrace
the Catholic and ancient faith; and I protest that there is no
other in which you can be saved.</q> These were her sentiments
when almost come into her last agony, from which I perceived
that she was wholly converted from heresy, and full of charity
towards her neighbour; so having asked her a few questions, and
found that she was not troubled with any temptations of presumption
or of despair, I gave her as much help as I could in forming
and uttering acts of the opposite virtues. After which, when she
was on the point of death, I offered her a picture of the Passion
of Christ, and she embraced and kissed it with the greatest
affection. I put also a blessed medal into her hands, and
reminded her to invoke the name of Jesus in her heart at least, in
order to gain the indulgences, although she could not speak. I
then asked her to give some sign to show that she did thus from
her heart, whereupon she caught hold of the medal and kissed it,
repeating this action several times. Observing she made answer
to me by signs, I bade her conceive a great sorrow for ever
having offended God, Who was so good in Himself, and had
shown so great mercy to her, and to give a sign of it by raising
her hand: she did so with great earnestness; then to conceive
sorrow that she had ever been in heresy, and had resisted God
and the Church, of which also she gave a sign; then to conceive
the wish that all heretics might be converted, and that she
willingly offered her life for their conversion, and she again made
the signal with great earnestness, and also took my hand within
her own, which were already chill, and held it firmly, repeating
<pb n='clxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxiii'/>
the signs that she was pleased with the suggestions I made to
her. And I continued up to her last gasp, encouraging her, and
exhorting her to praise God in her heart, to desire that all
creatures should praise and serve Him, and to offer her life for
this end. And she gave me answer to everything, now raising, now
lowering her hand; just as I asked her to do in assent to what I
suggested. All the by-standers, who were numerous, and a Priest
also who was among them, were in great admiration, and declared
that they never witnessed such a death as this. For she continued,
as I have said, responding to my suggestions up to the very last
breath, raising her hand slightly when she could no longer raise it
much. In these interior acts she gave up her soul, without any
trouble of mind or convulsion of body, but like one going off to
sleep, she went to rest in peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Her youngest daughter had already died holily in our house
before her mother. The second daughter married a rich man,
and brought him to me from a considerable distance to be made
a Catholic. The eldest still lives in the same house, to be
espoused not to man but to God, for she has a vocation to the
Religious state. In the meantime she lives there religiously, and
devotes herself to the service of Religious, as the lady of the house
always did, and does still....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I gave the Spiritual Exercises in this house to many others,
as well to those who formed part of the family as to others; and
in each case the fruit which I hoped for was produced....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But suddenly all things were upset for a time, and all good
hindered by the Powder Plot, as it is called. And if proof were
wanting that I knew nothing of this affair, this alone would be
sufficient, that at that very time I had sent several from England
across the sea into these parts. One was a lady, who was going
to be a Nun in the Benedictine Convent at Brussels, whither I
had sent two others not long before, who are now in high authority
there. Another had been an heretical minister, whom I had
brought to the Faith and instructed. He was the last that I
received into the Church before these disturbances. When these
persons, with certain others, were on the point of crossing the
Channel, orders were sent to allow no ships to leave; they were,
consequently, all taken and thrown into prison, from which they
<pb n='clxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgclxxiv'/>
were released two years ago. He who had been a minister is at
present studying in the Roman College; and the lady of whom I
spoke is now professed in the convent whither she was going
when she was taken. Only one other minister besides the one
just mentioned did I convert in England, and he is now a Priest
and is working in that vineyard. I also sent over many youths
to the Seminaries while I was in this last residence of mine, who
will, by God's help, give fruit in due season.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But if we have received good things from God's hands, why
should we not also bear with evil things?&mdash;if those things can be
truly called evil which are sent from Him, and therefore sent that
He may draw good from them, for those who receive them well,
and humbly recognize and adore His providence, both when He
gives and when He takes away. He had, indeed, given me many
and great consolations in this residence; interior consolations
chiefly, from conversions and from the signal progress in virtue of
many souls; but exterior consolations were not wanting. For in
external matters everything was well and abundantly supplied me.
I had several excellent horses for my missionary journeys, and all
that I could wish for to carry on the work I had in hand. Then,
in the house itself, the arrangements were made in the best way
both for our health and our convenience. And for companion I
had Father Strange, who is now in the Tower<note place='foot'>Qui nunc in rure est (MS.). An evident mistake of the copyist for <q>in
turre,</q> as is clear from a former passage, where Father Gerard says, <q>Father
Thomas Strange is at present suffering imprisonment in the Tower of London,
where he has had to undergo many grievous tortures, and a long solitary confinement.
This solitude indeed, if we look only to his natural disposition,
cannot but be very irksome and oppressive to him; but <emph>he</emph> is not solitary who
has God always present with him, consoling him, and supplying in an eminent
degree and full abundance all those comforts which we are wont to go begging
for from creatures.</q></note> (for Master Digby
had obtained Father Percy from the Superior), and another Priest
who resided a long time with us. We had, moreover, good store
of useful books, which were kept in a library without any concealment,
because they had the appearance of belonging to the young
Baron, and of having been left him by his uncle,<note place='foot'>Sir Ambrose Vaux, Prior of St. John of Jerusalem.</note> who was a very
learned and studious nobleman, and was well known for his piety.
He had, in fact, resigned the right and title of the barony to his
<pb n='clxxv'/><anchor id='Pgclxxv'/>
younger brother, the father of the present lord, in order that he
might more entirely and securely devote himself to God and his
studies. If he had lived a little longer, he would assuredly have
been a member of our Society, for on his death-bed this was the
only thing that caused him regret, namely, that he could not then
be admitted into the Society, a thing he desired most earnestly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Our vestments and altar furniture were both plentiful and
costly. We had two sets for each colour which the Church uses;
one for ordinary use, the other for Feast-days: some of these latter
were embroidered with gold and pearls, and figured by well-skilled
hands. We had six massive silver candlesticks on the altar,
besides those at the sides for the Elevation; the cruets were of
silver also, as were the basin for the lavabo, the bell, and the
thurible. There were, moreover, lamps hanging from silver chains,
and a silver crucifix on the altar. For greater Festivals, however,
I had a crucifix of gold, a foot in height, on the top of which was
represented a pelican, while on the right arm of the cross was an
eagle with expanded wings carrying on its back its young ones,
who were also attempting to fly; on the left arm a phœnix
expiring in flames that it might leave an offspring after it; and
at the foot was a hen with her chickens, gathering them under
her wings. All this was made of wrought gold by a celebrated
artist....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But I, who was not sufficiently grateful to God for these
benefits which I have mentioned, and many others, was compelled
to leave them to others who could use them better and to
greater advantage.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For since it was my chief friends who were involved in that
disaster of the Powder Plot, the Council on this account believed
me to be privy to it, and from the first sought for me with great
persistence and severity. They sent certain magistrates to search
our house most exactly, with orders, if they found me not, to stay
in the house till recalled, to post guards all round the house
every night, and to have men on the watch both day and night
at a distance of three miles from the house on every side, who
were to apprehend all whom they did not know and bring them
before the Justices. All this was done to the letter. But
immediately the news reached us of such a plot having been
<pb n='clxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgclxxvi'/>
discovered, and we learnt that certain of our friends had been
killed and others taken, expecting that in such a season we,
too, should have something to suffer, we had made all snug
before they came, so that they found nothing. They continued
searching, however, for many days, till at last my hostess discovered
to the Justice in chief command one of the hiding-places
in which a few books had been stowed away, thinking that he
would then desist from searching any further, under the
impression that if a Priest had been in the house he would
have been hidden there, yet they continued in the house for full
nine days; and I, meanwhile, remained shut up in a hole where
I could sit, but not stand upright. This time, however, I did
not suffer from hunger, for every night food was brought to me
secretly; nay, after four or five days, when the rigour of the
search was somewhat relaxed, my friends even took me out at
night and warmed me at a fire, for it was wintry weather, just
before Christmas-tide. And when nine days had passed the
searching party withdrew, believing it impossible I could be
there so long without being discovered.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the meantime they had taken a Priest, who, knowing
nothing of the watch set about the place, was coming to our
house for safety. This good Priest (by name Thomas Laithwaite,<note place='foot'>This name is written <q>Lathuilli</q> in the MS. English names frequently
suffer at the hands of this copyist. We have restored the true name by the aid
of Dr. Oliver's <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>.</note>
who is now of our Society, and is labouring in England) had left
us a few days before at my request, when we heard of the Plot, in
order to communicate with Father Garnett, and obtain from him
for me instructions how to act in the present crisis. Even on his
way thither he was taken, but escaped again for that time in the
following manner. His captors took him to an inn, intending to
bring him up for examination and committal the next day. On
entering the inn he took off his cloak and sword and laid them on
a bench; then, on pretence of looking after his horse and getting
him taken to water, he went to the stable, and, as there was a
stream near the house, he bade the boy lead the horse thither at
once, and himself went along also. When they had come to the
stream and the horse was drinking, <q>Go,</q> said he to the lad, <q>get
<pb n='clxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxvii'/>
ready the hay and the straw for his bed, and I will bring him
back when he has drunk.</q> The boy returned to the stable
without further thought, and he, mounting his horse, spurred
him into the stream, and swam him to the opposite bank. Those
in the inn, seeing his cloak and sword still lying there, had for
some time no suspicion of his stratagem; but hearing from the
stable-boy what had happened, they saw they had been outwitted,
and immediately set off in pursuit. They were, however, too late,
for the fugitive, knowing the way well, got to the house of a
Catholic before night, and lay hid there for a few days. Then,
finding that he could not get to Father Garnett, and thinking all
danger had passed in our direction, he tried to return to me.
But while avoiding Charybdis he fell into the clutches of Scylla;
for, as I said above, he was taken on his way to our house, and
dragged to London. They were not able, however, to prove him
a Priest, and his brother was allowed to buy him his freedom for
a sum of money.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Two other Priests who were resident with me in that house
(one of whom, as I said before, was Father Strange), at the
beginning of their troubles wished to go to Father Garnett and
remain with him. Both of them, however, were taken prisoners
on their way; one was thrown into Bridewell, and was afterwards
banished, together with other Priests, while Father Strange, the
other, was sent to the Tower, where he suffered much, as has
been before mentioned.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXVI.</head>

<p>
<q>The history of the Plot, its causes and consequences, is but
too well known; since it has been written by both friends and
enemies, though perhaps by neither exactly as it ought to be. I
myself, when I came from England to Rome, was ordered to put
in writing an account of the whole affair, and did so as well as I
could. There is no need, therefore, to repeat here what I
wrote at length on that occasion....</q><note place='foot'>Father Gerard here gives a summary of his Narrative of the Gunpowder
Plot.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I will now add a few words about myself before closing this
narrative. I have stated in the other treatise, of which I spoke,
<pb n='clxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxviii'/>
that a proclamation was issued against three Jesuit Fathers, of
whom I was one; and, though the most unworthy, I was named
first in the proclamation, whereas I was the subject of one, and
far inferior in all respects to the other. All this, however, I
solemnly protest, was utterly groundless; for I knew absolutely
nothing of the Plot from any one whatsoever, not even under the
seal of confession as the other two did; nor had I the slightest
notion that any such scheme was entertained by any Catholic
gentleman, until by public rumour news was brought us of
its discovery, as it was to all others dwelling in that part of the
country.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I saw by that long search of nine days that I was
sought after and aimed at in particular, I wrote a public letter, as
if to some friends, in which, by many arguments, and by protestations
beyond all cavil, I maintained my entire innocence of
the charges brought against me. Of this letter I caused many
copies to be taken, and to be dropped about the London streets
very early in the morning. These were found and read by many
persons, and a copy was shown to the King by one of the Lords
of Council, who was no enemy either of mine or of my cause.
The King, as I heard, was personally satisfied by this. Afterwards,
however, when information was given them of Father Garnett's
hiding-place, and they conceived hopes of catching him, and of
turning the whole charge on the Society, they thought it
necessary to publish the names of some of ours as the principal
contrivers of the Plot. So they put my name down, as well as
those of the other two Fathers, of whom they had heard from a
certain servant of Master Catesby. This man, however, before
his death, repenting of this injury he had done them, confessed
that he had been induced to say what he did of them against his
conscience, by the fear of death on the one hand, and by the
hope of pardon, and by the persuasions and suggestions of
Secretary Cecil on the other. And it is possible that some
persons at that time had a real suspicion that I was privy to the
thing, because they knew that many of the gentlemen who had
been taken were friends of mine, and were in the habit of visiting
me at my London house. This, indeed, was acknowledged by
one of them in his examination, though at the same time he
<pb n='clxxix'/><anchor id='Pgclxxix'/>
affirmed that I knew nothing of their scheme. Nor did they
ever get a single word against me from any of their examinations.
Master Digby, indeed, who was known to be most
intimate with me, and for that reason was most strictly examined
about me, publicly protested in open court that he never dare
mention a syllable of it to me, because I should never have
permitted him to go on with it. When I heard of all this, and,
besides, had learnt several particulars concerning Father Garnett,
which proved that any knowledge he had was under seal of confession,
and imparted to him by the only Priest of the Society
who knew of it, and that also only in confession, it seemed to
me that I was sufficiently cleared of the charge; and in order to
bring this fact into notice, I prepared three letters to three Lords
of the Council, a little before the death of the condemned
conspirators, in which I showed more at full that I was
completely ignorant of the whole matter, and pointed out how
they might satisfy themselves of the same while those gentlemen
were yet alive. Whether they did so or not, I do not know; but
this much I know, that in the whole process of Father Garnett's
trial, in which after the receipt of these letters they tried their
utmost to defame the whole Society, and in particular to charge
this Plot on the English mission, they never once mentioned me.
They spoke, indeed, of three Fathers as guilty, but they named
those two who had heard of it in confession, and Father
Ouldcorne, not as privy to the Plot beforehand, but as an
accomplice <hi rend='italic'>post factum</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Nevertheless, I took the greatest precaution to remain
hidden; and I lay at a place in London known to no one.
So by the protection of God I continued safe, and if it had
seemed good I could have remained so still longer. I did not,
therefore, leave England to avoid being taken, but as in that great
disturbance it was no time for labouring, but rather for keeping
quiet, I took a favourable opportunity that presented itself of
passing over into these parts and reposing a little, that after so
long a period of distracting work in all kinds of company, I
might take breath and recover strength for future labours. Why,
even at that very time when I was keeping so close, and when
nearly all my friends were either in prison, or so upset that they
<pb n='clxxx'/><anchor id='Pgclxxx'/>
could scarcely help themselves, much less me, though I had lost
the house I had in London, through the fault of one who disclosed
it, as I have said, and though strict watch was kept
everywhere, and danger beset me on all sides; yet, before I
had settled to leave England, I managed to hire another house
in London very fit for my purpose, perhaps more so than the
former. I managed also to furnish it with everything necessary,
and made some good hiding-places in it; and there I remained
in safety the whole of Lent before my departure. Besides this
house I also hired another, finer and larger than this, which I
intended should be in common between Father Antony
Hoskins and me. This house after my departure was used by
the Superior of the mission for a considerable time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The first of these last-mentioned houses I brought into
some little danger, about the end of Lent, in order to rescue one
of our Fathers from imminent danger. The thing happened in
this wise. The good Father, by name Thomas Everett, had gone
to a gentleman's house in London, where there were some false
brethren, or else some talkative ones; for the fact reached the
ears of the Council. And as he is something of my height, and
has black hair, Cecil thought it was I of whom notice was given
him, and said to a private friend of his, <q>Now we shall have him,</q>
naming me. However, he had neither the one nor the other.
For I, learning that the Father had gone to this place, where he
could not possibly remain hidden, asked my friend, in whose
house I had myself been concealed before I had procured and
furnished my new abode, to fetch him and keep him close in his
house for a time, which he did. Here he remained while the
house he had just left was undergoing a strict search. Now it so
happened that, after a few days, a search was also made in the
very place to which he had been brought, on account of some
books of Father Garnett's which had been seen, and which this
gentleman used to keep for him. After rifling the place well and
finding no one, for Father Everett had betaken himself to a
hiding-place, they carried off the master and mistress of the
house, and threw them into prison. Now when I heard this, and
knew there was no Catholic left in the house, fearing lest the
Father should either perish with hunger, or come forth to be
<pb n='clxxxi'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxi'/>
taken, I sent persons from my own house, to whom I described
the position of his hiding-place. They went thither, and called
to him, and knocked at the place, for him to open it; he,
however, would neither open nor answer, though they said that I
had sent them for him. For, as he did not know their voices, he
was afraid that this was a trick of the searchers, who sometimes
pretend to depart, and then after a time return, and assuming a
friendly tone, go about the rooms, asking any who are hidden
to come out, for that the searchers are all gone. The good
Father suspected that this was the case now, and therefore made
no answer. My messengers remained a long time trying to
reassure him, and at last were obliged to return, but so late, that
they fell into the hands of the watch. They were detained in
custody that night, and got off with some difficulty the next day.
One of them, however, was recognized as having formerly lived
with a Catholic, and was therefore believed to be a Catholic
himself, and as it was now known that he lived in the house
that I had hired, this brought that house into suspicion, though
it had been ostensibly hired by a schismatic, who was under no
suspicion at all. The consequence was that some four days later
the chief magistrate of London, who is called the mayor, came
with a <hi rend='italic'>posse</hi> of constables to search the house.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the meantime, hearing that Father Thomas would not
answer, and knowing well that he was there, to prevent his
perishing from starvation, I sent the next night another party with
the man who had made the hiding-place and knew how to open it.
The place was thus opened, and the good Father rescued from
his perilous position. They brought him to my house, and there he
remained. I myself, however, before he arrived, had gone to a
friend's house, a very secure place, for the purpose of staying there
a little, as I had some fears that the apprehension of my servants
a day or two back might bring the searchers to my house. My
fears were well founded: for on Holy Thursday, while Father
Everett was saying Mass, and had just finished the Offertory,
there was a great tumult and noise at the garden gate; and the
mayor used such violence, and made such quick work of it, as to
have entered the garden, and the house, and to be now actually
mounting the stairs, just as the Father, all vested as he was, and
<pb n='clxxxii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxii'/>
with all the altar furniture bundled up, had entered his hiding-place.
So near a matter was it, that the mayor and his company
smelt the smoke of the extinguished candles, so that they made
sure a Priest had been there, and were the more eager in their
search. But of the three hiding-places in the house they did not
find one. So they departed, taking with them those men whom
they found in the house, and who acknowledged themselves to be
Catholics, and the schismatic also who passed for the house-holder.
After this, having again released Father Everett from his
hiding-hole and advised him to leave London, I determined not
to use that house again for some time. And seeing that the
times were such as called us rather to remain quiet, than to gird
ourselves for work, I took the first opportunity of crossing the sea
and coming into these parts.<note place='foot'>In a letter addressed by Father Ouldcorne to the Council, dated March
25, 1606, in which he relates all that had passed in the Tower between Father
Garnett and himself, but in a way that could not be hurtful to either, the
following passage occurs. <q>Also Mr. Garnett told me that while he was in
the Gatehouse he received a note written in orange (but he told me not from
whom) whereby he understood that Father Tesimond was gone over sea, and
that Father Gerard would presently follow him after he had recovered a little
more strength: <q>whereby</q> (said Garnett) <q>I gather he hath been lately in some
secret place, as we were; but by this I hope he hath recovered his strength,
and is also past over the sea</q></q> (P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 214).</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I recommended my friends to different Fathers, asking them
to have special care of them during my absence. As for my
hostess,</q> Mrs. Vaux, <q rend='pre'>she was brought to London after that long
search for me, and strictly examined about me by the Lords of
the Council; but she answered to everything so discreetly as to
escape all blame. At last they produced a letter of hers to a
certain relative, asking for the release of Father Strange and
another, of whom I spoke before. This relative of hers was the
chief man in the county in which they had been taken, and she
thought she could by her intercession with him prevail for their
release. But the treacherous man, who had often enough, so far
as words went, offered to serve her in any way, proved the truth
of our Lord's prophecy: <q>A man's enemies shall be those of his
own household;</q> for he immediately sent up her letter to the
Council. They showed her, therefore, her own letter, and said to
her, <q>You see now that you are entirely at the King's mercy for
<pb n='clxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxiii'/>
life or death; so if you consent to tell us where Father Gerard is,
you shall have your life.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I do not know where he is,</q> she answered; <q>and if I did
know, I would not tell you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then rose one of the lords who had been a former friend of
hers, to accompany her to the door out of courtesy, and on the
way said to her persuasively, <q>Have pity on yourself and on your
children, and say what is required of you, or otherwise you will
certainly die.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To which she answered with a loud voice, <q>Then, my lord,
I will die.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This was said when the door had been opened, so that her
servants who were waiting for her heard what she said, and all
burst into weeping. But the Council only said this to terrify her,
for they did not commit her to prison, but sent her to the house
of a certain gentleman in the city, and after being held here in
custody for a time, she was released, but on condition of
remaining in London. And one of the principal Lords of the
Council acknowledged to a friend that he had nothing against her
except that she was a stout Papist, going ahead of others, and, as
it were, a leader in evil.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Immediately she was released from custody, knowing that I
was then in London, quite forgetful of herself, she set about
taking care of me, and provided all the furniture and other things
necessary for my new house. Moreover, she sent me whole sheets
daily, recounting everything that occurred; and when she knew
that I wished to cross the sea for a time, she bid me not spare
expense, so that I secured a safe passage, for that she would pay
everything, though it should cost five thousand florins; and, in
fact, she sent me at once a thousand florins [100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>] for my journey.
I left her in the care of Father Percy, who had already, as my
companion, lived a long time at her house. There he still
remains, and does much good. I went straight to Rome, and
being sent back thence to these parts, was fixed at Louvain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have received two signal benefits on the 3rd of May,
through the intercession, as I think, of blessed Father Garnett,
who went to Heaven on that day. The first was as follows: When
I had come to the port where, according to agreement, I was to
<pb n='clxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxiv'/>
embark with certain high personages, in order to pass unchallenged
out of England, they, out of fear, excused themselves from performing
their promise. And in this mind they continued till the
hour of the day fixed for embarking. Now just at that time Father
Garnett's martyrdom was consummated in London, and he being
received into Heaven remembered me upon earth; for the minds
of those lords were so changed, that the Ambassadors themselves
came to fetch me, and with their own hands helped to dress me in
Spanish costume, so that I might be taken for one of their suite,
and so pass free. All went well, and I do not doubt that I owed
it to Father Garnett's prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The other and greater benefit is that three years later, on
the same 3rd of May, I was admitted into the body of the Society,
by the four solemn vows,<note place='foot'>Both Father Bartoli and Father More remark that Father Gerard was
admitted to the solemn vows of a Professed Father by a special favour, as his
learning, owing to the short course of study through which he had passed, fell
short of that which the Society requires as a condition of Profession. Father
Bartoli says that this <q>most rare but most just privilege</q> was conferred on
him, <q>as virtue, in which he exceeded the standard, supplied for the studies in
which he fell short of it</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, p. 586).</note> though most unworthy. This I look
upon as the greatest and most signal favour I have ever received,
and it seems to me that God wished to show me that I owed this
also to the prayers of Father Garnett, from an exact similarity
in the circumstance of time between my profession and his
martyrdom. For the day originally fixed for both had been the
1st of May, the Feast of the Holy Apostles SS. Philip and James,
and in both cases unforeseen delays postponed the event till the
3rd of May.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God grant that I may truly love and worthily carry the
Cross of Jesus, that I may walk worthy of the vocation whereunto
I am called. This one thing I have asked of our Lord, and this
will I continue to ask, that I may dwell in the House of God all
my days, until I begin to prove myself grateful for so great a
favour, and that though hitherto unfruitful, yet by the fertility
of the olive-tree in which I have been grafted, I may at length
begin to bear some fruit!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='clxxxv'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxv'/>

<div>
<head>XXVII.</head>

<p>
Here the Autobiography of Father Gerard ends. Though he
survived his escape from England thirty-one years,<note place='foot'>Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, pp. 586, 592.</note> we have not
much more to relate of the events of his life. We have, however,
first a few notes to record on the concluding portion of the
narrative.
</p>

<p>
First, with regard to the brave Elizabeth Vaux. She was
re-arrested, long after the liberation of which Father Gerard has
told us, for in a letter from Louvain to Father Aquaviva, the
General of the Society, dated August 17, 1612, he gives the
following account of her conduct, and that of her son, Lord
Vaux, in prison. We translate from the Latin original.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iii., n. 111.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Lord Vaux remains in prison under condemnation, but by
no means cast down. He seems with invincible courage to
trample on rather than to be deprived of the world, and not so
much to have lost as to have contemned its goods. His praise
certainly is in the mouths of all men. And his cause is so honourable
to him, and to the Catholic religion, and so disgraceful to his
enemies, that the King seemed to be ready to let the Baron go,
and to restore him all his goods, when, God so disposing it, and
preserving His servant for great things, some men making a more
careful search than usual, found out that the mother of the Baron,
who was herself under condemnation and in prison, but who
retained all her fervour and devotion, had received a Priest into
her cell on the very Feast of St. John Baptist. When the officers
entered, they found a good Father who had just completed the
Holy Sacrifice, and was in the act of distributing the most holy
Body of Christ to those who were assisting. Mrs. Vaux herself,
and two others, had communicated. The Priest turned back to
the altar, and quietly received the remaining Hosts, lest they
should fall into sacrilegious hands. The first man who entered
the room, seeing the altar well appointed, and all of them
kneeling before the Blessed Sacrament, was astounded; and
forgetting the fierceness with which, under similar circumstances,
most people rush upon a Priest, only uttered these words:
<pb n='clxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxvi'/>
<q>Has not your ladyship suffered enough already for this sort
of thing?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The wonder is of old standing on the part of those who do
not understand how blessed is the life that God will give to those
who never change their fidelity to Him, and who, fearing God
more than the King, even though they have but just escaped
death, still wish to bury the dead. So our good Father Cornforth
was taken: a very holy man, whose life well deserves recording.
He was carried off to the pseudo-Prelate of Canterbury, and as he
could not conceal his Priesthood on account of those with whom
he was taken, so neither would he for his own safety's sake, hide
his Religious state. So he was sent off to that prison from which
they usually take their victims when they want an offering for the
god of heresy. Canterbury then went to the King in all haste
and fury, and putting fire to the cotton to raise a flame, so
inflamed the King's mind against the Baron, that he seems to
have diverted him from his inclination to set him free to the very
reverse. But notwithstanding all this, as the Baron has those
counsellors for him who are most powerful with the King, we all
hope that the King will soon be pacified, and that all will end
well for our friend, especially if your Paternity and yours will help
him with your holy prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the Public Record Office we have various papers which
add a little to what Father Gerard has here written. Letters<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 68, n. 67, and vol. 71, n. 24; Chamberlain
to Carleton.</note>
dated February 26 and October 22, 1612, say that Mrs. Vaux,
Lord Vaux's mother, was condemned to perpetual imprisonment
for refusing to take the oath of allegiance, and that Lord
Vaux was transferred to the custody of the Dean of Westminster.
The Privy Councillor, who was their friend, was Henry Howard,
Earl of Northampton. There are three letters<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 70, nn. 25, 46, 55; dated August 3,
12, and 20, 1612.</note> extant from him
to Viscount Rochester in behalf of the Vauxes. In the first he
says that Lord Vaux's sister [Katherine, wife of Henry Nevill,
Lord Abergavenny] has presented a petition that her brother and
mother may, on account of the hot season, be removed from their
<pb n='clxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxvii'/>
keeper's house in town to that in the country; but they being
imprisoned for life on a <foreign rend='italic'>prœmunire</foreign>, the matter rests with the
King. And this, in the third letter, he says the Archbishop and
Council consented to, if they can still be under charge of their
keeper. The second letter thanks Lord Rochester for his intercession
in behalf of Lord Vaux and his mother, and adds that
they expect but little mercy where the Metropolitan [Archbishop
Abbot] is mediator. Lastly, we have the grant<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Sign. Man.</hi>, vol. iii., n. 6.</note> to Lord Vaux of
Harrowden of his lands, &amp;c., at Harrowden and elsewhere, in the
counties of Essex, Bedford, Nottingham, Lincoln, and Cambridge,
which were forfeited to the King on his conviction in a <foreign rend='italic'>prœmunire</foreign>
for refusing the oath of allegiance. Later on, May 4, 1625,
Charles I. granted him a special pardon<note place='foot'>Rymer's <hi rend='italic'>Fœdera</hi>, t. xviii., f. 44.</note> for <q>not repairing to
the Protestant church and forbearing the same,</q> which is recited
to be <q>a contempt of the King's crown and dignity.</q>
</p>

<p>
The proclamation for the apprehension of the three Fathers
gives a description of Father Gerard.<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Proclamation Book</hi>, p. 121.</note> <q>John Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi>
Brooke, of stature tall, and according thereunto well set; his
complexion swart or blackish; his face large; his cheeks sticking
out, and somewhat hollow underneath the cheeks; the hair of his
head long if it be not cut off; his beard cut close, saving little
mustachoes, and a little tuft under his lower lip; about forty
years old.</q> To this we may add the description<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 165, n. 21.</note> of Father
Gerard given by the ruffian Topcliffe, whose spelling is sufficiently
<q>kewryoos</q> to be worth retaining. It is dated in the Calendar
of the Record Office, 1583, but this is evidently erroneous, as
Father Gerard escaped from the Tower in 1597.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Jhon Gerrarde y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Jhezew<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> preest that escaip out of the
Tower and Richard Blount a Seam<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ry</hi> preest of estymacion, and a
thirde preest intend to passe ou<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> rather after then w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> the Lo
Imbass at Dov<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> Rye or thirabowtts upon y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> coast.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They have provided for a Culler to passe w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>thout</hi> suspycion a
Seale lyke a Seale of the Counsall table to bleare the Eye<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> of
Seartchers and officers. Therefore it were not amysse That some
<pb n='clxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxviii'/>
order were lefte w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> my Lorde Trasorr that he gyve order that the
Lres do passe under such a Seale from y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> Lls. But under &amp; w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi>
summe prevey mark upon the lres besides the seale. Then any
passendg<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> that carryethe a lre w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>thowte</hi> suche a prevy mrk Is
fytt to be stayed for a tyme Until hee bee knowen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Jhon Gerrarde, y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Jhezew<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> is about 30 years oulde Of a
good stature sumwhat highe<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> then S<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> Tho Layton &amp; upright in his
paysse and countenance sum what stayring in his look or Eyes
Currilde heire by Nature &amp; blackyshe &amp; not apt to have much
heire of his bearde. I thincke his noase sum what wide and
turninge Upp Blubarde Lipps turninge outwards Especially the
over Lipps most Uppwards toword the Noase Kewryoos in
speetche If he do now contynewe his custome ... And in his
speetche he flourrethe &amp; smyles much &amp; a falteringe or Lispinge,
or dooblinge of his Tonge in his speeche.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Yor honor<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> as you will comāde me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ric Topclyffe</hi> alias.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed</hi>&mdash;<q>Concerning Gerrard the Priest and others.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What Sir Thomas Leighton's height may have been we do not
know, but in the copy of this description sent by Cecil to Anne,
Lady Markham,<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 18, n. 19.</note> a pen has been passed through the words <q>Sir
Thomas Leighton,</q> and the word <q>ordinary</q> is written in its
stead. The proclamation was nearer the truth than Topcliffe
as to Father Gerard's age, which was then forty-two.
</p>

<p>
A correspondence between Cecil and Lady Markham betrays
to us an offer made by her <q>to deliver the person of Gerard into
the hands of the State.</q> Her object was to obtain the pardon and
restoration of her husband, Sir Griffin Markham, who was in
banishment for having taken part in Watson's conspiracy. One of
Cecil's correspondents says,<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 47, n. 96.</note> of <q>certain lady of Nottinghamshire,
called the Lady Markham,</q> <q>this more I know, that there
is not the like pragmatical-headed lady in this part of England.</q>
</p>

<p>
Her letters<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 16, n. 88; vol. 18, n. 4.</note> are interesting for the mention of her two
<pb n='clxxxix'/><anchor id='Pgclxxxix'/>
servants, who had gone to live with Father Gerard, but still more
for the testimony she bears to the general belief entertained by
Catholics in Father Gerard's sanctity, and to the improbability in
the judgment of all who knew him of his being a party to
the Plot.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q>Right Honourable,&mdash;Your lordship may think me slack in
performing that which I so freely made promise of, but the death
of my father hath so much appalled me as I am not fit to do
as I would. I did hear Mr. Gerard was taken, which something
stayed me. Moreover, your lordship hath Mr. Ha. Hurlston in
hold, who may direct you the best concerning him of any I know,
as also I take it Sir Everard Digby came for Mr. Walley</q>
[Father Garnett]; <q rend='pre'>but thus it is I cannot learn where Mrs.
Vaux is, neither if I knew durst I visit her. And this is most
strange to me, neither of those which were my servants comes to
me, which makes me think they remove with Mr. Gerard, or are
imprisoned, but I rather think they are shifted out of the way,
because their attendance will make their master more acceptable,
one of them being an exquisite painter and the other a perfect
good embroiderer. The painter is a black man, and taller than
the embroiderer, whose hair is yellowish, and was called
Christopher Parker by his true name. The painter was called
Brian Hunston. I am bold to inform you thus largely of them
because I verily suppose they attend their wandering friend and
master, but where, till I either see them or hear some directions,
I cannot imagine; but I protest to your lordship, if I could learn
I am resolved he should speak with you, if by any means I could
procure it, for I fear this most vile and hateful Plot hath taken
deep and dangerous root, because I meet with many that will as
easily be persuaded there was no gunpowder laid as that holy
good man was an actor in the Plot; and surely the generality did
ever so much admire him, that they were happy or blessed in
hearing him, and their roof sanctified by his appearance in their
house. I am to go shortly into the country. If it would please
your lordship to give me leave to send a man to my husband
I should be much bound to you, for I cannot tell till I hear
from him how to determine of those businesses occasioned by
<pb n='cxc'/><anchor id='Pgcxc'/>
my father's death. I humbly beseech you commiserate my
affliction and grant me this poor request, if it stand with your
liking, and I shall ever pray for your increase of honour and
happiness. So I humbly take my leave this 18th of November,
1605.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Your lordship's most humble to command,</q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Anne Markham.</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed</hi>&mdash;<q>The Lady Markham to my Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Right Honourable,&mdash;Afore I came out of London I sent to
know your lordship's pleasure, but mine uncle could not meet
with Mr. Lewnus, and indeed I did think my credit was so
decayed with the Padre that I could not do as I would, employ
my best endeavours to perform thereby to express my great
desire of your lordship's good opinion. Now I find either
necessity of their part or my two servants' credits hath given
me so much power as I shall shortly see Mr. Gerard, but for the
day or certain time they are too crafty to appoint, but whensoever
I will do my best to keep him within my kenning till I hear from
your lordship, and then, my credit preserved, which is dearer to me
than life, your command shall be as truly obeyed as if your most
trusty servant were commanded. I do perceive there are great
business in hand, and your lordship is, next to His Majesty, most
shot at, but what the project is I dare not be very inquisitive of,
because it is not ripe, as by circumstance I perceive; and I
labour to make myself in good estimation with them, which
would not be if I covet to know more than they like. This, I
protest to God, is only to do service to your lordship. There
had been some of them with me ere this, but great occasion hath
drawn them to haste into other places, whither I know not. If
the watch had continued but two days longer, Mr. Gerard had
been pined out at Harrowden. I hear Ric. the butler is close in
the Gatehouse, yet your lordship knows that prisons are places of
such corruption as money will help letters to their friends to tell
what they have been examined of, so they will guess shrewdly
how to shift. I have none that I do trust about me with my
resolution to do my best endeavours to preserve your lordship,
therefore I am enforced to be brief. I beseech you pardon it in
<pb n='cxci'/><anchor id='Pgcxci'/>
me, that writes in fear, but if it please your honour to send your
note or directions to mine Uncle Harvey, I will expect till that he
send them, and ever pray God to protect you from these most
dangerous conspirators. For the true trial of my devotion in that
prayer I will most sincerely labour your preservation, so I humbly
take my leave this 3rd of January.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Your lordship's at command,</q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Anne Markham.</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>To the Right Honourable my very good lord the Earl of
Salisbury. Haste this.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed</hi>&mdash;<q>3rd January, 1605[-6]. Lady Markham to my
Lord.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The following is Cecil's answer.<note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 18, n. 19.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Madam,&mdash;Although I do confess my great mislike of the
daily resort and residence of the Priests, and especially the Jesuits,
whose end can be no other than of pernicious consequence to this
estate, yet, being in hope that warnings would make them retire
from further tempting of law, I have used no extraordinary course
for their apprehension, being, I confess, full of tenderness in
matters of blood. But having now discovered, by many confessions
of the late conspirators, that some of these Jesuits have
passed so far as to be persuaders and actors in this barbarous
conspiracy, which excludeth almost all offices of humanity from
men that have softest hearts, I have thought good to take your
offer for His Majesty's service, to deliver the person of Gerard
(who is one of those) into the hands of the State. For which
purpose, although your letter doth not well express what you
would have done, whereby both the service may be effected and
your name covered; yet I have procured a warrant, here inclosed,
which will be sufficient to authorize and command any man to
whom you shall direct it, which I have left to your own choice to
put in, because I know not who they are which dwell thereabouts
in whom you dare repose trust. And unless you have the warrant
presently, and in the instant to execute, I know the inconvenience
<pb n='cxcii'/><anchor id='Pgcxcii'/>
of the protraction. You shall therefore do very well to observe
how the warrant is made, and thereby shall you perceive that the
party to whomsoever you shall direct it is authorized sufficiently,
and will receive this warrant from anybody's hands whom you
shall send; so as if you will choose any of your own to carry it to
any such gentleman as you shall like, that third party need not
say he comes from you, but from some other, and yet he may
bring the gentleman that you shall name upon the back of the
warrant to execute all things according to your direction. Lastly,
madam, this I say unto you, that either your religion is very foul,
or you will make no difficulty to discover such a pernicious
creature, as differs so far from the rest of the society (as I am
persuaded); wherein I will add thus much further, that you shall
be an instrument of reflecting His Majesty's good opinion to
your husband, and confirm the conceit I have of you, that you
would not trouble yourself and me in this kind unless you meant
sincerely. And so I commit you to God. From the Court at
Whitehall, this 15th of January, 1605[-6].</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Your ladyship's loving friend,</q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Salisbury.</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>There are only three of your churchmen in this wicked
predicament, Gerard, Father Walley, and Father Greeneway, so
as it is indifferent to the State which of these be come by. This
letter is sent according to your direction to Mr. Stringer, who
shall receive it from the next post to him, and the packet to the
post is signed by the postmaster's hand, and not by mine, who
knoweth not the contents nor anything of you, and yet his hand
will make the less suspicion. I desire you to keep safe both
this mine own letter and the warrant, because I may have both
delivered again hereafter, if there be no cause continuing to use
them hereafter, and I will do the like with your letter, which I
reserve for you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed</hi>&mdash;<q>To the Lady Markham.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The <q>certain high personages</q> with whom he crossed the
Channel were the Ambassadors of Spain and Flanders.<note place='foot'>Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, p. 586.</note> The
<pb n='cxciii'/><anchor id='Pgcxciii'/>
former was the Conde de Villa Mediana, the latter Don Pedro de
Zuniga. It is remarkable that, though Topcliffe had said that
Father Gerard intended <q>to pass over rather after than with the
Lord Ambassador,</q> his conspicuous person should have been
allowed to pass.
</p>

<p>
On reaching the Continent in safety, he went, as he tells us,
straight to Rome, whence, we learn from Father More,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. vii., n. 43, p. 339.</note> he was
sent to Tivoli for awhile, for rest of mind and body. He was
then appointed English Penitentiary in the Basilica of St. Peter,<note place='foot'>Archives of the English College at Rome, <hi rend='italic'>Scritture</hi>, vol. 30; 1632.</note>
and this was his field of work till the spring of 1611.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., Father Grene's <hi rend='italic'>Miscell. de Coll. Angl.</hi>, p. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
We have a letter,<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iii., n. 70.</note> dated <q>this Simon and Jude's daie, 1606,</q>
from Father Andrew Whyte, afterwards the Apostle of Maryland,
addressed, <q>To his especial good friende Mr. Garret geue these
att Roome.</q> It was to ask him to speak to Father Persons to get
Richard Green received into the Society, who had been sent to
College by Father Gerard, and had been imprisoned <q>about the
time of this late commotion.</q> Green <q>was received very kindly</q>
by Father Walley [Garnett] <q>and provided for very charitably in a
manner as one of the Society, with a promise that the year following
he should be received without fail;</q> but now, as <q>few or
none of Father Walley's writings or determinations were found,
and Richard Fulwood gone which should have given particular
testimony,</q> Father Whyte begs that <q>he may either be sent to
the Novitiates of other countries with the license of the General,
or else may have a promise to be next that is received at
Louvain.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXVIII.</head>

<p>
To this Novitiate at Louvain we now turn, as it was thither that
Father Gerard was next sent. It was the foundation of Donna
Luisa de Carvajal, who by her will<note place='foot'>More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. vii., cap. 3, p. 291.</note> dated Valladolid, Dec. 22,
1604, left 12,000 ducats for the establishment of an English
Novitiate. The document is an admirable specimen of true
Spanish devotion and humility. After commending her soul to
<pb n='cxciv'/><anchor id='Pgcxciv'/>
God by the intercession of our Blessed Lady, she proceeds&mdash;<q>For
the love of God I humbly pray the Superiors of the Society
of Jesus and the Præpositus of the Professed House, as a favour,
to grant me some little place in their church where my body may
be buried, in consideration of the devotion I have ever entertained
for their holy Religious Order: to which Order, in the
manner that I have thought would be most to the glory of God,
I offer, with the greatest affection, a gift which, though but small,
is all that I have. And if a burial-place be refused me in that
church, my executors will obtain for me a resting-place in some
other church of the Society: and if they are unable to obtain this,
let me be buried in some monastery in which, for the love of
God, they may be willing to give burial to a poor person like
myself; and let my funeral be conducted in accordance with this
my poverty. As executors I name Father Richard Walpole,
the Vice-Prefect of the English Mission, and the Confessor of the
English College in this city, or their successors. After them (and
I have named them first from respect to their priestly dignity) I
name the Condessa de Miranda, Donna Maria de Zuniga, Donna
Maria Gasca, Don Frances de Contreras, Melchior de Molina,
and Don Luis de Carrillo e Toledo, Conde de Caracena. First
of all I declare that many years ago, when I was with my uncle,
I made a vow to God to dedicate all my goods to His glory and
greatest service. Then His Divine Majesty gave me large desires
and vehement attraction to spend myself above all things for the
preservation and advancement of the English Fathers of the
Society of Jesus, who sustain that kingdom like strong columns,
defend it from an otherwise inevitable ruin, and supply efficacious
means of salvation for thousands and thousands of souls. Wherefore
I offer them to the most holy Virgin our Lady, I place them
under her protection, and I name and leave her universal heir of
all my goods.... And I give possession of them henceforward
to the most glorious Virgin, and in her name and place to Father
Robert Persons, or failing him, to the Father who shall succeed
him as Superior of the Mission: but with this condition and
obligation, that such goods shall be applied to the founding of a
Novitiate of English Religious of the Society of Jesus, in whatever
kingdom or part of the world shall seem to Father Persons to be
<pb n='cxcv'/><anchor id='Pgcxcv'/>
to the greater glory of God. But in the case that England shall
be brought back to the faith and obedience of the Roman Church,
my will is that the said revenue be transferred into that kingdom,
for the foundation of a Novitiate of the Society there, unless it
shall seem better to Father Persons, for reasons concerning the
Catholic religion, to leave the Novitiate beyond the kingdom.</q>
</p>

<p>
Time was not lost in carrying out the intentions of this pious
benefactress.<note place='foot'>More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. viii., n. 8, p. 355.</note> In 1606, Father Persons obtained possession of
a large house in Louvain, which had been inhabited by the
Knights of Malta, and thus came to be called St. John's, though
the church attached to it was dedicated to St. Gregory the Apostle
of England and other Saints. Father More, who lived there with
Father Gerard, tells us that it was on high ground commanding
the whole city; below was a walled garden, and on the slope of
the hill pleasant walks amongst the vines which were ranged in
terraces, and the whole, though within the city walls, as quiet and
calm as befitted a house of prayer.
</p>

<p>
We do not know exactly the date of Father Gerard's arrival at
Louvain, or the office to which he was first appointed there. The
letter of the 17th August, 1612, to the General, from which we
have already given a large extract concerning Mrs. Vaux, is dated
from Louvain. It proceeds with an account of a miraculous cure
at the intercession of Father Thomas Garnett, the nephew of the
Provincial, who was martyred at Tyburn on the 3rd of June, 1608.
This father was the first Novice of St. John's, Louvain. That
Noviceship commenced in February, 1607, with six Priests, two
Scholastics, and five Lay-brothers, Novices, under Father Thomas
Talbot as their Novice Master. In 1614, St. John's received
students in philosophy and theology, as well as Novices, when a
house in the garden was fitted up for the Novitiate and Father
Henry Silisdon was installed in St. John's as Rector of the new
College. This arrangement did not last long, for at the end of
the year the Novitiate was transferred to Liége. No less than
fifteen letters have come down to us written by Father Gerard
in the year 1614, addressed to the Prefect of the English Mission,
Father Thomas Owen, Rector of the English College at Rome.
They treat chiefly of the purchase of the new house at Liége,
<pb n='cxcvi'/><anchor id='Pgcxcvi'/>
and the transfer of the Novitiate to that city. Some extracts
relating to Father Gerard himself will be found interesting.
Some of them are signed John Nelson and others John Tomson.
In later years he seems to have been known only by the name
of Tomson.
</p>

<p>
The choice of Liége as a residence seems to have been
mainly owing to the disquiet caused to the Catholics in the
Low Countries by the remonstrances of the English Government.
We have some specimens of it in the following
extracts, in which we find Father Gerard true to the natural
fearlessness of his character. <q>Concerning<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 5.</note> my wariness in
avoiding the eyes of spies, I have been all this year more
sparing in that kind than divers friends here did think needful,
although some one or two did think it dangerous to go any
journey, as doubting I might be killed by the way, but this was
but according to their accustomed fears with which I have been
long acquainted. But, indeed, Father, I am so far from desire
to go many journeys, that it is a pain to me to think of going
anywhither, and the reason why I never went to any of those
places your Reverence mentioneth in this year past (but only the
last Lent to Maclin for Mr. Rouse) was not that I thought it
dangerous (being known so well to live here public that it cannot
be unknown to any spies), nor for that I wanted leave, for I had
the other Provincial's particular and willing grant, without my own
asking, to go to any place of these countries; but it was because
I had rather be at home: and in the town of Lovaine itself, I go
not abroad half so much as I think were needful for the contentment
of others. I was not at the Teresians, where the Mother of
the House (to whom I gave the Exercise four years ago) and
Father Scott's<note place='foot'>This is Father Thomas Laithwaite, also called Kensington (More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Prov.</hi>, lib. ix., n. 1, p. 391; <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgclxxvi'>clxxvi</ref>).</note> sister do much desire my often coming, any more
than once since the last Lent. At the Monastery of St. Monica's,
my cousin Shurley hath requested my coming thither for these
three or four months, to bestow one afternoon upon her and
some younger Nuns whom she hath charge of, that they may
altogether ask me what spiritual questions they may like best,
<pb n='cxcvii'/><anchor id='Pgcxcvii'/>
and I have never yet found a fit time for it; and, indeed, I
doubt I am to blame for it. The gentlemen in the town<note place='foot'>In 1617, Sir Thomas Leeds was Prefect and Sir Ralph Babthorpe
Secretary of the Congregation of the Blessed Virgin at Louvain (Stonyhurst
MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 47). A considerable number of Catholic families
had settled in Louvain, and in 1614 they were disturbed by a summons to
appear in England under pain of losing their possessions. On a remonstrance
being made by the Spanish Ambassador, King James disclaimed the summons,
on which the magistrates of Louvain expelled the pursuivant from the town
(More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. ix., n. 10, p. 406).</note> I
doubt I visit not once in a quarter of a year, and I have some
reason to think that either they think me careless of them, or
afraid to be seen abroad, as though my case were very dangerous,
which would also make them or any other that should come to
town more fearful to come into my company, and consequently
hinder the little good that I might do with them. But I hope I
shall be as wary as your Reverence wisheth, and if this course go
forwards of being Rector without the name of Rector, there will
be less inconvenience, whosoever see me seeing me still as a
private man.</q> In this he alludes to a plan of his own, that
Father Blackfan should have the title of Rector, although he
himself had been appointed to the Rectorship of the Novitiate.
</p>

<p>
The next letter is dated April 6, 1614.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 6.</note> <q>I have yours of
the 15th March, and see in that, as in all of yours, your fatherly
care of me, which, by the grace of God, I will labour to deserve.
I am well satisfied with Father General's order, and shall endeavour
to get this building finished for the Novitiate as soon as
I can, and then will settle to my book as much as my health
and letters will permit.... Having writ thus far, I was
called to go to Bruxels with Father Rector (by Father Blacfan's
and Father Percy his advice) to speak with the Duke's<note place='foot'>The Archduke Albert, Governor of Flanders.</note> Secretary,
who telling Father Percy the last week that the Agent did solicit
against me, and that he could not well answer him, unless he
delivered him some reasons in writing for my innocency, this
writing was promised him by Father Percy; but I being loath
to have any such writing sent, as thinking it the likeliest means
to raise a new persecution against me, though for the Secretary's
satisfaction we drew and delivered him a brief note of four or
<pb n='cxcviii'/><anchor id='Pgcxcviii'/>
five effectual proofs, yet both to the Secretary first, and afterwards
to the Nuncio, I told this day that if any such writing were
sent it would do me great harm, for Canterbury having such a
writing would doubtless show it at the Council table, and then
those lords who secretly do know me to be innocent, and wish
me well, will be, as it were, forced to speak against me, lest
they should seem to favour me, and so the King should be
more incensed. The Nuncio did promise Father Rector and
me that he would seriously deal both with the Secretary and
the Prince himself in the cause.</q>
</p>

<p>
Writing under date April 18, 1614,<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 7.</note> he shows that he thinks
that too much importance had been given to the Agent's interference.
<q>I think your Reverence was made to believe by
letters sent about Easter, that there was some new troubles
against me here, out of England, and consequently that there was
need of such information to the Nuncio and Father Provincial
as had been given. But when I heard of it, I said it was nothing
but Trumbol his own device, in hope to work upon the weakness
of the Prince; and so now it proves, for I am going to the
Secretary himself with our Father Rector, as I wrote from
Bruxells, and giving him a paper of some few points for my
innocency, with the request he would not deliver it, but show
it if he would to the Agent. The Secretary answered he would
advertise me if it were needful; but since the note was showed
unto Trumbol, and he showed to be satisfied with it, and
afterwards meeting the Secretary told him that he took it to
be only matter of religion; but that being now made matter
of State, he, being a servant employed in matter of State, could
not but seek to concur with them that employed him, as it were
granting that himself was satisfied, and yielding a reason why he
had moved the matter. And this being understood both by the
Prince and the Nuncio, they were very glad of it.... I
write this from Maclin, whither Sir William [Stanley] was desirous
to have me come for his comfort now and after the death and
funeral of his lady.</q>
</p>

<p>
But such a man as Father Gerard was not likely to be left in
peace in those intriguing times. In the August following, Father
<pb n='cxcix'/><anchor id='Pgcxcix'/>
Silisdon writes to Father Owen.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 17.</note> <q>Even now I have advice
that His Majesty of England hath made two complaints to the
Prince, and that the first is against Father Gerard's being in his
dominions.</q> The consequence was that a transfer to another
territory became desirable, and Father Gerard set his heart on
migrating with his Novices to Liége. He writes from that city,
under the signature of John Nelson, Sept. 19, 1614.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, n. 22.</note> <q>There
be many causes to be alleged why here, rather than in any
place; as the commodity of dealing with our English in the
summer, the opportunity of keeping our Novices unknown, the
excellent seat far beyond Lovaine, and that bestowed on us,
the present helps sent for this beginning, with great likelihood
of much more; the great favour which is to be expected from
this Prince and his family, and is to be strengthened by my two
cousins, Sir William and Mr. Morton, and Sir William hath
written to him that he doth much joy in his cousin who is
there to be Rector.</q> The two cousins of whom Father Gerard
here speaks were two very powerful friends. The one was
Sir William Stanley, who showed himself a kind friend to Father
Gerard and his charge by negotiating the purchase of the
property at Liége in his own name, and advancing the purchase
money&mdash;at least, that portion of it which had to be paid
down<note place='foot'>Father Gerard bought a house and ten acres of land; and the price was
less than <q>200<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> in present money and the rent of 30<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> with which the house
and grounds are already charged, which then we may redeem by little and
little, as we get friends to buy it out</q> (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv.,
n. 23). As the rent could be redeemed at fifteen years' purchase, the whole
price was thus under 650<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi></note>&mdash;probably (as Father Gerard speaks of the <q>seat being
bestowed upon us</q>) regarding it as a gift. Whatever else was
requisite for the purchase was provided by Brother William
Browne, who, though<note place='foot'>More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. ix., n. II, p. 406.</note> grandson, brother, and uncle of Viscounts
Montague,&mdash;his grandfather was Queen Mary's Ambassador to
the Holy See&mdash;was himself content to spend his life in the
humble duties of a Jesuit Lay-brother.
</p>

<p>
The <q>Mr. Morton</q> was Sir George Talbot of Grafton, afterwards
<pb n='cc'/><anchor id='Pgcc'/>
ninth Earl of Shrewsbury. He was a scholar of some repute,<note place='foot'><q>Sir Basil Brooke telleth that our German friend is very well at his
house, and in protection of the King, that Canterbury has used him very
kindly, and entreated him, as one whose scholarship is famous, to make use
of his library [as] it shall please him.</q> Father Silisdon to Father Owen,
August 25, 1614. Endorsed by Father Owen&mdash;<q>Sir Geo. Talbott well
entertained by K. and Cant.</q> (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 17).</note>
and an intimate friend of Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria. As
Ferdinand, the Prince-Bishop of Liége, was Maximilian's brother,
it was no little help to Father Gerard to be on <q>cousinly</q> terms
with George Talbot. The Duke became a generous benefactor
to the new House at Liége. In 1618 he sent Father Gerard,
through Sir George Talbot, 5,000 florins for the Noviceship.<note place='foot'>More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. ix., n. 15, p. 414.</note>
In a letter dated Jan. 25, 1620, the Duke writes to Father
Gerard, who had promised to pray that he might have a son:
<q>I bound myself once by vow to your Blessed Ignatius, that
if he would obtain this favour for me, I would give my son the
name of Ignatius, and would build and endow a College of
the Society wherever Father General might judge it most useful.
What if God should purpose thus to provide for you?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, pp. 415, 424. Maximilian had two sons by his second wife, Mary
Anne of Austria, when he was over 60 years of age, and the eldest he named
Ignatius.</note> In
July of the same year he wrote: <q>We have sent you a contribution
of 1,300 German florins by Father Mayer for a tabernacle
for the Blessed Sacrament, and for a niche for an image of the
Blessed Virgin.</q> Even after Father Gerard's departure from
the House, Duke Maximilian's liberality to it did not fail.
Father Silisdon, Father Gerard's successor as Master of Novices,
removed the Novitiate to Watten,<note place='foot'>The Priory of Watten, with its revenue of 3000 florins of Brabant, was
transferred to the Society in 1611 by James Blase, O. S. F., Bishop of St.
Omers. The proposal had been approved of by the King of Spain in 1604,
and by Pope Paul V. in 1607, but the jealousy of the English felt by the
Archduke Albert delayed the establishment of an English Novitiate there till
his death in 1622 (More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. vii., nn. 5-7, lib. ix., n. 17,
pp. 294-298, 416).</note> and not long after the Duke
settled a permanent endowment upon the College of Liége,
which was begun in the House that Father Gerard had established.
</p>

<p>
Father Gerard's Socius or <q>Compagnion,</q> as he calls him,
<pb n='cci'/><anchor id='Pgcci'/>
was Father Henry More, subsequently the historian of the
Province. When discussing, before his appointment, those
Fathers who were fitted for that office, after mentioning others, he
says: <q>Father Nicholson is far short of either of them for my turn,
for he is no good Latinist, I think little better than myself, though
he be much better scholar; neither hath he any other language
but Spanish, of which I shall have small use. Father Henry
More hath French well, Dutch prettily, and Italian sufficiently,
besides Spanish very well, and Latin as I would wish him.</q><note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
As to his first Novices, he had twelve, which made what he
styled <q>a pretty beginning.</q><note place='foot'>They soon increased in numbers, for in 1617 Father More says there was
a Community at Liége of 45, of whom 30 were Novices (p. 424).</note> They were <q>the two that expect
at Liége, the two that are come from Rome, and four out of
Spain, with Mr. Lewkner and Mr. Whitmore, besides Grafton,
when he comes, and a tailor now servant in this house, who by
all judgments here is as fit to be received as Brother Silvester,
the young tailor now in the Noviceship, is fit to be dismissed.</q><note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
Of the two that <q>expected at Liége,</q> a previous letter had
said, <q>Here be also Mr. Mansel and Mr. Owen Shelley, by the
names of Mr. Griffin and Mr. Titchborn: both expect, the first
with some loathness to stay long, the second is wholly resigned.
The first is a pious man, and to those that know his fashion
will be profitable for some uses in the Society, but the second
will be practical and fit for anything, and in truth I think he
will do very well.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, n. 23.</note> This Father Owen Shelley was afterwards
Rector of the College of Liége, and justified Father Gerard's
judgment of his character.
</p>

<p>
Amongst the <q>four which are come out of Spain</q> were
two that must have constantly served to remind their Rector
at Liége of the Gunpowder Plot, as the remonstrances of King
James' Agent had managed to do at Louvain. <q>One of them,</q>
he says, <q>is akin to Father Garnett, and of his name, though
we call him Gilford, as he was called at St. Omers. William
Ellis, but we call him John Williams, for he was page<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</note> to Sir
<pb n='ccii'/><anchor id='Pgccii'/>
Everard Digby, and taken with him, though he might have
escaped, for his master offered him horse and money to shift
for himself, but the youth said he would live and die with him;
and so, being taken, was condemned at Stafford, and should
have been executed. He was offered to have his life if he
would go to their church, which he refused. In the end they
saved him and some others. He never [yielded] in the least
point. He hath good friends near Sir Everard Digby's whom
I know, and he is heir to 80<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a year, if his father do him right.</q><note place='foot'>Stonyhurst, MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 29.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the close of this short notice of Father Gerard's Rectorship
it will be but right to record an unfavourable judgment passed
upon him, as it will help us to form a true appreciation of his
character. It is the only instance that has come down to us
of blame on the part of one of his own brethren. <q>I see a
general fear in all ours, those of best judgment, of the success
of Father Nelson's government, and unless he hath a companion
that may moderate him, his zeal will, I fear, carry him too far;
and I fear it so much the more because I see him loath to have
anybody with him who is likely to propose anything to him
contrary to his own zealous desires.</q> This is in a confidential
letter<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, n. 31.</note> from Father Silisdon to Father Owen, dated Oct. 31,
1614, so that, as it was written before the transfer to Liége, it
was a misgiving lest he should be indiscreet as a Rector, rather
than a judgment on his actual conduct as a Superior.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXIX.</head>

<p>
During his residence at Liége, amongst Father Gerard's correspondents
were two venerable servants of God, Robert Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Father Luis de la Puente, better known by the
Latinized form of his name, de Ponte. As by a man's friends we
can obtain an insight into his character, we have thought it
desirable to give the few letters from these two holy men to
Father Gerard that have come down to us. Cardinal Bellarmine's
autograph is preserved at Stonyhurst.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, vol. iii., n. 107.</note> We translate the letter
from the original Latin.
</p>

<pb n='cciii'/><anchor id='Pgcciii'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Very Rev. and beloved Father in Christ,&mdash;I have received
your Reverence's letter dated from Liége the 23rd November,
with the little presents inclosed in it, an English knife, a little
case (either bone or ivory, I do not know which), and three small
toothpicks. I do not know whether these were sent me for use,
or as having some special meaning. Whichever it be they were
welcome, as a proof of friendship and brotherhood.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The memory of that excellent Mr. Oliver,<note place='foot'>This would appear to be a mention of the death of the <q>son and
brother of an Earl,</q> Sir Everard Digby's great friend, who was converted
when holding some office in personal attendance on King James, and,
after his conversion, received the King's leave to go to Italy (<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>
p. <ref target='Pgclxvi'>clxvi</ref>.). The intermediate link is furnished in Father Gerard's letter to
Father Aquaviva, Louvain, August 17, 1612 (Stonyhurst MSS., Angl. A.,
vol. iii., n. 111). <q>Now at length our friend Oliver has passed over from
Paris to England, for the Treasurer is gone, his and all good men's
enemy.</q> [Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, died May 24, 1612] <q>and
others are about to succeed him, who, as we hope, entertain for Oliver an
ancient and particular affection. Besides, his eldest brother is dead, and the
second brother left inheritor of all the honours and wealth, so that a manifold
occasion is offered to this our friend of helping himself in temporal affairs, and
others to some extent in spiritual and greater goods. Summoned by his family
he has left in haste, humbly asking your Paternity's benediction; in the efficacy
of which he disregards all that heretical fury or perverse malice can invent
against him. The King is going this summer to his brother the new Earl's
castle, to remain there awhile for hunting. Perhaps Oliver will take that
occasion of presenting himself to the King, who liked him when he was
in his service before he entered the service of God, and whom he has never
offended in anything, except in choosing to be an abject in the House of God,
rather than to dwell in the tabernacles of men.</q> We have here the necessary
data for determining that the convert in question was Sir Oliver Manners,
fourth son of John fourth Earl of Rutland, knighted at Belvoir Castle,
April 22, 1603, by James I. on his coming from Scotland. The eldest brother
Roger, fifth Earl, married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip Sidney, and died
without issue, June 26, 1612, when he was succeeded by his brother Francis.</note> whose acquaintance
I made very late, has brought me no little sadness, or rather
grief, not on his account, who is translated from this world to the
joys of Paradise, but for the sake of many whom without doubt
he would have converted to a good life if Divine Providence had
permitted him to live awhile longer. But the good pleasure of
God must ever be fulfilled, and the very same, in order that
it may be fulfilled, must ever be pleasing to us under all
circumstances.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I was pleased to read what your Reverence relates in your
<pb n='cciv'/><anchor id='Pgcciv'/>
letter of your journeys; of your office of Master of Novices; of
the building which you have bought at Liége; of the visitation of
His Serene Highness Ferdinand, the Prince-Bishop of Liége, and
of the promise that the Priory, at its next vacancy, shall be
applied to the College. If my assistance in carrying this out can
be of any use to you with the Pope, it shall not be wanting.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Of Dr. Singleton I have heard much, and have defended
him to the best of my power, as long as I could, but the party
opposed to him has prevailed. Nor do I see how I can help him
at so great a distance, and especially as I should be suspected,
because I am a Jesuit. The devil is envious of the harmony
between the English at Douay and the Fathers of the Society, for
which the good Cardinal Allen cared so much; but all means
must be tried to re-establish a true and sincere friendship, and
agreement in teaching; otherwise a kingdom divided against itself
shall be brought to desolation. For many reasons I say freely that
nothing can be done by me in his behalf; first, as I was just saying,
because I should be under suspicion, being a Jesuit. Then
because I am an old man of seven-and-seventy years of age, and
I daily expect the dissolution of my tabernacle. Thirdly, because
I cannot think of any manner in which I could help him. The
common way of helping men of this sort is to give them ecclesiastical
benefices, but here in Rome the multitude of those who
aspire to and seek after such benefits is so great that their
number is almost infinite. Nor are they only Italians, but
Spaniards also, Frenchmen, Germans, who look for nothing but
benefices at Rome. I myself, who was thought to have some
influence with the Pope, have laboured for more than ten years
for a Spaniard, an excellent man and a great friend of mine, to
obtain for him a good benefice falling vacant in his own country.
I could say the same of Flemish and German friends of mine.
What then would be the case with English people, in whose
country there are no ecclesiastical benefices for Catholics? But,
since these temporal things are nothing when compared to eternal
benefices, our friend Dr. Singleton must not be cast down if our
Lord treats him now, as of old He treated His Apostles, who
He willed should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven through
many tribulations. But I must not be too lengthy, for I know
<pb n='ccv'/><anchor id='Pgccv'/>
that both he and your Reverence stand in no need of my exhortations.
I know that your Reverence will have hard work to
read my bad writing, but Father Coffin<note place='foot'>Father Edward Coffin was Confessor of the English College for nearly
twenty years. He was succeeded by Father Gerard, who held the same office
for the last fifteen years of his life.</note> would have it that I
should write to you with my own hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>With this I bid your Reverence farewell. Commend me to
the prayers of Dr. Singleton, and of all your College; but your
Reverence's self especially, for our old friendship and brotherhood,
must diligently commend me to the Lord our God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>From Rome, on Christmas Day, December 25, 1618.<note place='foot'>Dr. Oliver has misread this date 1611. Cardinal Bellarmine was born
October 4, 1542, so that he would be in his seventy-seventh year in 1618-9.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Your Reverence's brother and servant in Christ,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Robert Card. Bellarmine</hi>.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>To the Very Rev. Father John Tomson, S.J.,</q></l>
<l><q>Rector of the College of the English Novices at Liége.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The two letters which have come down to us, addressed to
Father Gerard by the venerable Father Luis de la Puente, were
written just as his residence<note place='foot'>Dr. Oliver says that Father Silisdon succeeded Father Gerard as Rector
and Master of Novices in 1620, and transferred the Novitiate to Watten in
1622. Father More (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, p. 416) may certainly so be understood,
but it is clear from the <hi rend='italic'>Florus Anglo-Bavaricus</hi> (p. 11) that Father Gerard
was Rector in March, 1622, and that the transfer to Watten took place in
1625. And in the Archives of the English College at Rome (<hi rend='italic'>Scritture</hi>, vol. 30),
in a notice of him written in 1632, he is said to have been Rector of the English
Noviceship at Liége for eight years.</note> at Liége was drawing to a close.
We translate from Father Grene's transcript of the originals.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 532.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I. H. S.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>P.C.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I received your Reverence's letters, I was unable to
answer them at once, for I was suffering from extreme weakness,
which usually afflicts me every year all through the winter.
Blessed be our great God, from Whose providence come health
and sickness, life and death, and whatever prosperity and adversity
there is in this world. The height of felicity in this life is to be
<pb n='ccvi'/><anchor id='Pgccvi'/>
superior to all these things, seeking only God's good pleasure in
all things, for life in His will, and health, honour, happiness,
spiritual progress, and all sanctity consist in the fulfilment of
the will of God: and so every day I would that at every breath I
could say, May Thy most holy and most sweet will be done in
me, concerning me, and by me and about me, in all things and
by all things, now and always and for ever. Amen.<note place='foot'>Fiat in me, de me et per me, et circa me, sanctissima et dulcissima
voluntas Tua, in omnibus et per omnia, nunc et semper ac in æternum.
Amen (MS.).</note> God always
pours His spirit of prayer into those who so submit their will to
His; wherefore the Psalmist says&mdash;<q>Be subject unto the Lord
and pray to Him,</q> for when any one with prompt obedience and
entire resignation humbly submits himself to God, God Himself,
Who does the will of those that fear Him, in a certain way is
made subject to him, so that He does whatever is asked, God
becoming obedient to the voice of a man&mdash;not of any man soever,
but of the man who obeys God. Oh, wonderful power of prayer
and of obedience! Let us pray, my Father, that we may be
perfectly obedient, and let us obey, that we may be able to pray,
and to speak worthily with God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It will help wonderfully both one and the other, to meditate
profoundly on these two things: to wit, Who God is in Himself,
and what He is towards us, and then what we are of ourselves,
and what towards God. For whilst I think of God, His Trinity
and Unity, most beautiful, most wise, most holy, most full
of love for me, immense and everywhere present, the fountain of
all good things that are in me and beyond me, from Whom I
myself depend, and all that is mine, and everything that I use
and enjoy, how can I do otherwise than love Him with all my
strength? How shall I not praise Him and thank Him constantly?
How shall I not give my whole self to His service?
And these affections become the more ardent as I ponder that I
have nothing of myself; that I am nothing, and that I and all
that is mine would be reduced to nothing unless I were preserved
by Him. Now whilst, within this immensity of God, I consider
what I have been and what I am towards Him, I am horrified
and tremble as I ponder on my malice, my ingratitude, my slothfulness.
<pb n='ccvii'/><anchor id='Pgccvii'/>
Hence arise feelings of hatred of self, of humiliation
and self-denial, and various acts and exercises of penance, which
not only nourish humility by which a man, through a truthful
knowledge of himself, becomes vile to himself, but they also
arouse a most ardent charity by which he loves his Supreme
Benefactor, Who has conferred and still confers so many and
such great benefits on one who is ungrateful and unworthy. Thus
the mind is elevated to perfect contemplation and union with God
Himself, and, as it were forgetful of itself, is immersed in Him,
or rather God hides it in the concealment of His countenance
from all disturbance of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Here is a short epitome of my mystical theology, which I
have put out at rather greater length in my book; but why should
I teach these things to a doctor of others and my own master?
Surely I have become foolish, but your letters compelled me.
Would that you would help me by your prayers, that what I write
in my letters I may perform in deed. Forgive my humble and
poor style, for I know not any more elegant; but I am sure that
you do not care for words, but for the sense that is in the words.
I value very highly the cross which you have sent me, and I will
always bear it with me. I hope, by the intercession of the Blessed
Virgin, who appeared in that tree,<note place='foot'>An allusion, no doubt, to one of the Belgian Sanctuaries of our Blessed
Lady, perhaps that at Montaigu.</note> and who confers such benefits
on those who are there and those who visit her, that I may be a
partaker of those benefits, for though I am absent in the body I
am present in spirit.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I humbly commend myself to the Holy Sacrifices of your
Reverence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Your Reverence's unworthy servant in Christ,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>[Cross] <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ludovicus de Ponte.</hi> [Cross]</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Valladolid, March 23, 1621.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Postscript</hi>&mdash;<q>By God's help I have finished a great work. Its
title is, <hi rend='italic'>Expositio Moralis in Canticum Canticorum</hi>, containing
exhortations on all the mysteries and virtues of the Christian
religion. It is divided into two volumes, and each volume into
five books. The arrangement is new and singular, but not without
<pb n='ccviii'/><anchor id='Pgccviii'/>
foundation in the Sacred Text. The matter is grave in itself, and
very copious, taken out of Holy Scripture and the holy Fathers.
The style is humble, but clear and chaste, and not out of
harmony with matter that is spiritual and sacred, and therefore
elevated. It is printed at Paris, and will soon reach Germany
and Belgium. Would that it may be to the glory of God, the
edification of the Church, and of use to one's neighbour.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The other letter from the same Father was written in reply to
one from Father Gerard announcing that he was about to leave
Belgium.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>I. H. S.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>P.C.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>May the Almighty and most pitiful Lord accompany you in
the journey that you begin, for with such a Guide and Companion
you will be everywhere safe and cheerful, and making true progress.
Let Him ever dwell in your memory, understanding, and will, for
His most sweet providence especially protects those who make
their journeys from obedience to Superiors, as Jacob did, who at
his father's bidding journeyed through the desert into Mesopotamia,
where he heard the voice of the Lord, which said to him,
<q>I will be thy Keeper whithersoever thou goest.</q> Trusting to
this hope, and protected by this guardianship, you will happily
fulfil what you have begun.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I commend myself to your Reverence's Sacrifices and
prayers, for my weakness oppresses me much; but may the will
of God be done in me and about me in all things and by all
things, to Whom concerning all things be glory for ever. Amen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>[Cross] <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ludovicus de la Puente.</hi> [Cross]</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Valladolid, Feb. 2, 1622.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With these saintly words our materials for writing the life of
Father John Gerard abruptly fail us. Beyond what has been
recorded we only know that he was sent first to Spain, and then
to Rome, which he reached Jan. 15, 1623.<note place='foot'>Stonyhurst MSS., Father Grene's <hi rend='italic'>Miscell. de Coll. Angl.</hi>, p. 19, quoting
<q>Baines his diary.</q></note> He was Confessor to
the English College till his death, July 27, 1637, at the ripe age of
seventy-three, and upwards.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ccix'/><anchor id='Pgccix'/>

<div>
<head>XXX.</head>

<p>
In this Autobiography Father Gerard has laid before us his life in
all the freedom and unreserve of a confidential communication
with his Religious brethren and Superiors. It is not possible, we
are convinced, for any impartial person to rise from its perusal
without a deep conviction that Father Gerard was a gentleman
and a Christian, a man of honour and religious principle; and in
many cases this sense of his integrity will be accompanied with
some of that personal regard and affection with which he inspired
those who lived in intimacy with him. He bore too much for
principle, and made too great sacrifices, for us to think that he
would deliberately and perseveringly commit sin to free himself
from blame. Yet this is the supposition that is involved in an
attack upon his veracity in the compilation of his Narrative of the
Gunpowder Plot.
</p>

<p>
It is quite true that he, and many others, considered themselves
justified, when their own lives or those of innocent persons
were at stake, in the use of assertions that were simple falsehoods
in the ordinary sense of the terms employed. These they called
equivocations; and we find no trace in the period of which we
are writing of the modern sense of the word, that is, of a true
expression which is really beside the point, though it is so
employed that it is very unlikely to be seen to be so by the
person to whom it is addressed, who thus is said rather to be
suffered to deceive himself than to be deceived. Practically the
distinction is hard to draw, and it has the disadvantage of
seeming to make the morality of the expression depend on the
quickness and readiness of the person in danger, who may be
able to think of phrases containing a real ambiguity but which yet
would throw the hearers off the right scent.
</p>

<p>
According to modern feeling, Father Gerard would have been
quite justified in examining the trees and hedges in search of a
falcon<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</note> he had not lost, and inquiring of all he met whether they
had heard the tinkling of the bird's bells, although it was to make
them think that he had lost a falcon, in other words, to deceive
<pb n='ccx'/><anchor id='Pgccx'/>
them; but by the same modern feeling he would be held to be
guilty of a lie when he said that he was the servant of a lord in a
neighbouring county, though he might, without guilt, have worn
that lord's livery as a disguise if he could have obtained it,
which would have been a more effectual deception than any
words.
</p>

<p>
Again, according to modern judgment, John Lilly would be
held guilty of a lie when he said<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgcxl'>cxl</ref>.</note> of Gerard's books and manuscripts,
<q>They are mine;</q> but quite guiltless when, with the
same intention of making the magistrates believe him to be a
Priest when he was not, he said, <q>I do not say I am a Priest,
that is for you to prove.</q> Yet the latter expression was
far more likely to deceive than the former. It was more
like what a Priest, under the circumstances, would have said.
Present feeling would condemn him of a lie for saying simply,
that the books were his, when it would acquit him if he
had thought of using far more deceptive expressions, such
as <q>I am not bound to compromise myself by saying whose
they are.</q>
</p>

<p>
The only difference between modern morality and that on
which Father Gerard acted was that now-a-days men say, <q>Have
recourse to evasions.</q> Then men said, <q>Say what you like, it is
their fault if they think it true.</q> It is evident that of the two
courses of proceeding, the plain-spoken old way is the least open
to abuse. No one certainly would have recourse to it excepting
from a well-weighed plea of a sorrowful necessity. Whereas, on
the other hand, evasions are not startling, and the conscience
may lay but little stress on the presence or absence of
justifying circumstances. For it is most necessary to bear
seriously in mind that all Catholic divines then held, and now
hold, that to make use of equivocation excepting under those
peculiar circumstances that make it lawful, is in itself a sin, and
thus no escape from the sin of lying. So Father Garnett plainly
said when on his trial,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</note> <q>As I say it is never lawful to equivocate
in matters of faith, so also in matters of human conversation, it
may not be used promiscually or at our pleasure, as in matters of
contract, in matters of testimony, or before a competent judge, or
<pb n='ccxi'/><anchor id='Pgccxi'/>
to the prejudice of any third person: in which cases we judge it
altogether unlawful.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is but fair that, in reading the narrative of times when many
lives hung on successful disguise and concealment, we should
remember that the modern sense of equivocation was then
unknown. Protestant moralists have spoken out their minds
plainly enough on this subject.
</p>

<p>
<q>Great English authors, Jeremy Taylor, Milton, Paley, Johnson,
men of very distinct schools of thought, distinctly say that under
certain extreme circumstances it is allowable to tell a lie. Taylor
says: <q>To tell a lie for charity, to save a man's life, the life of a
friend, of a husband, of a prince, of a useful and a public person,
hath not only been done at all times, but commended by great
and wise and good men. Who would not save his father's life, at
the charge of a harmless lie, from persecutors or tyrants?</q>
Again, Milton says: <q>What man in his senses would deny that
there are those whom we have the best ground for considering
that we ought to deceive, as boys, madmen, the sick, the intoxicated,
enemies, men in error, thieves? I would ask, by which of
the Commandments is lying forbidden? You will say, by the
ninth. If then my lie does not injure my neighbour, certainly it is
not forbidden by this Commandment.</q> Paley says: <q>There are
falsehoods which are not lies, that is, which are not criminal.</q>
Johnson: <q>The general rule is, that truth should never be
violated; there must, however, be some exceptions. If, for
instance, a murderer should ask you which way a man is
gone.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apologia pro Vita sua</hi>, by John Henry Newman, D.D. London, 1864,
p. 418. The reader's attention is earnestly called to Dr. Newman's treatment
of this subject, both at the page quoted, and in the Appendix, p. 72. To the
Protestant authors quoted above may be added Mr. Froude (<hi rend='italic'>History of England</hi>,
vol. ii., ch. vi., p. 57, note). <q>It seems obvious that a falsehood of this sort is
different in kind from what we commonly mean by unveracity, and has no
affinity with it.... Rahab of Jericho did the same thing which Dalaber
did</q> [a Protestant, who gave false answers and swore to them, to save Garret,
his fellow] <q>and on that very ground was placed in the catalogue of Saints.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
This <emph>language</emph> would not have been used by Catholics.
With them the word <q>lie</q> signified a simple falsehood; and an
<q>equivocation</q> was a false expression used under such circumstances
that if they to whom it was addressed were deceived by it,
<pb n='ccxii'/><anchor id='Pgccxii'/>
it was their own fault. They had then no right to the truth, and
even in some cases it would have been a sin to tell them the
truth.
</p>

<p>
In substance, however, though not in form, the doctrine of
Gerard, Southwell, and Garnett, was the same as that of Taylor,
Milton, and Johnson. But to confine ourselves to the practice of
Father Gerard, this doctrine is not necessary for his defence, and
if his conduct be fairly examined, he will be held, even from
the modern point of view, to have done no wrong. Protestant
moralists, as we have seen, permit men under certain circumstances
to tell a lie with intent to deceive. And Catholic
moralists permit under such circumstances assertions which
would lead the hearers to deceive themselves by neglecting to
advert to the limit of the speaker's obligation to tell the truth.
But with regard to Father Gerard's legal interrogations, we may
waive the question whether they are right or wrong in their
morality, for we see clearly that he so expressed himself as to
show that his words were not intended to be believed.
</p>

<p>
The real parallel to them, alleged by Gerard himself, as we
shall shortly see, is the prisoner's usual plea of <q>Not guilty.</q> This
is the only form in which the <emph>question</emph> is now put to a person
accused. But in those days the question was put over and over
again, and in every variety of form. To deny was really to plead
<q>Not guilty,</q> and if this be lawful once, it was lawful whenever
they were forced to repeat it. Not only was it a capital offence
to be a Priest within the realm, but it was high treason to be
reconciled to the Church, or absolved by a Priest, or to harbour
or comfort one. Thus the interrogations addressed to prisoners
were always intended to make them criminate themselves or
others; that is, in the one case to cause them to plead guilty, so
that they might be condemned to death on their own confessions;
or, in the other case, to force them to become Queen's evidence,
and be accessory to the infliction upon others of the extremest
penalties enacted by an unjust law.
</p>

<p>
The first instance that occurs in Father Gerard's Life, is that
when, after his apprehension, on being questioned he declared
that he was quite unacquainted with the family of the Wisemans,
and those who were examining him betrayed their informer
<pb n='ccxiii'/><anchor id='Pgccxiii'/>
by crying out, <q>What lies you tell! Did you not say so-and-so
before such a lady as you read your servant's letter?</q>
Then he adds, <q>But I still denied it, <emph>giving them good reasons
however why, even if it had been true, I could and ought to have
denied it</emph>.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgli'>li</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another time<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pglxviii'>lxviii</ref>.</note> he was confronted with three servants of Lord
Henry Seymour, who avouched that he had dined with their
mistress and her sister, the Lady Mary Percy, that it was in Lent,
and they told how their mistress ate meat, while Lady Mary and
Father Gerard ate nothing but fish. <q rend='pre'>Young flung this charge in
my teeth with an air of triumph, as though I could not help
acknowledging it, and thereby disclosing some of my acquaintances.
I answered that I did not know the men whom he had
brought up.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But we know you,</q> said they, <q>to be the same that was at
such a place on such a day.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>You wrong your mistress,</q> said I, <q>in saying so. I, however,
will not so wrong her.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>What a barefaced fellow you are!</q> exclaimed Young.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>Doubtless,</q> I answered, <q>were these men's statements true.
<emph>As for me, I cannot in conscience speak positively in the matter, for
reasons that I have often alleged; let them look to the truth and
justice of what they say.</emph></q></q>
</p>

<p>
A third instance is the interview<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>.</note> between Father Gerard and
the widow Wiseman, in the presence of the Dean of Westminster,
Topcliffe, and others. <q rend='pre'>They wanted to see if she recognized
me. So when I came into the room where they brought me,
I found her already there. When she saw me coming in with the
gaolers, she almost jumped for joy; but she controlled herself,
and said to them: <q>Is that the person you spoke of? I do not
know him; but he looks like a Priest.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Upon this she made me a very low reverence, and I bowed
in return. Then they asked me if I did not recognize her?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I answered: <q>I do not recognize her. <emph>At the same time,
you know this is my usual way of answering, and I will never
mention any places, or give the names of any persons that are
known to me</emph> (which this lady, however, is not); <emph>because to do
<pb n='ccxiv'/><anchor id='Pgccxiv'/>
so, as I have told you before, would be contrary both to justice
and charity</emph>.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Lastly, when examined<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgcxiv'>cxiv</ref>.</note> by the Attorney General, after having
received a letter from Father Garnett, warning him to prepare
himself for death, and after having freely confessed that he was a
Priest and a Jesuit, and that he had reconciled others to the Pope,
and drawn them away from the faith and religious profession
which was approved in England, <q>answers,</q> he says himself,
<q>which furnished quite sufficient matter for my condemnation,
according to their laws,</q> and after having denied that he had
meddled in political matters; his examination proceeded as
follows.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hereupon Mr. Attorney kept silence for a time, and then
he began afresh to ask me what Catholics I knew; did I know
such-and-such? I answered, <q>I do not know them.</q> <emph>And I
added the usual reasons why I should still make the same
answer even if I did know them.</emph><note place='foot'>Ostendi non esse hoc falsum dicere (MS.).</note> Upon this, he digressed to
the question of equivocation, and began to inveigh against
Father Southwell, because on his trial he denied that he knew
the woman who was brought forward to accuse him.<note place='foot'>This was the wretched Anne Bellamy, a young Catholic gentlewoman,
who for some overbold denunciation of the persecutors was given into the
custody of the ruffian Topcliffe, and was so deeply depraved by him, as to be
brought to the almost incredible infamy of serving as his tool to inveigle and
betray Priests.</note> She
swore that he had come to her father's house and was received
there as a Priest; this he positively denied, though he had
been taken in that house and was found in a hiding-place,
having been betrayed by this wretched woman. (A dutiful
daughter truly, who thus betrayed to death both her spiritual
and her natural father! Christ our Lord, however, came not
to send peace, but a sword to divide between the good and
the bad; and in this case he divided the bad daughter from
the good parents.) Good Father Southwell, then, though he
marvelled at the impudence of this miserable wench, yet denied
what she asserted, and <emph>gave good reasons for his denial</emph>, well
knowing and solidly proving that it was not lawful for him
<pb n='ccxv'/><anchor id='Pgccxv'/>
to do otherwise, lest he should add to the injury of those who
were already suffering for the Faith, and for charity shown to
him. Taking this occasion, therefore, he showed very learnedly
that it was lawful in some cases, nay, even necessary perhaps,
to use equivocation; which doctrine he established and confirmed
by strong arguments and copious authorities, drawn as
well from Holy Scripture as from the writings of the Doctors
of the Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Attorney General inveighed much against this, and
tried to make out that this was to foster lying, and so destroy
all reliable communications between men, and, therefore, all
bonds of society. I, on the other hand, maintained that this
was not falsehood, nor supposed an intention of deceiving,
which is necessary to constitute a lie, but merely a keeping
back of the truth, and that where one is not bound to declare
it: consequently there is no deception, because nothing is refused
which the other has a right to claim. I showed, moreover, that
our doctrine did no way involve a destruction of the bonds of
society, because the use of equivocation is never allowed in making
contracts, since all are bound to give their neighbour his due,
and in making of contracts truth is due to the party contracting.
It should be remarked also, I said, that it is not allowed to
use equivocation in ordinary conversation to the detriment of
plain truth and Christian simplicity, much less in matters properly
falling under the cognizance of civil authority,<note place='foot'>In subornatâ gubernatione Reipublicæ (MS.). There is clearly some
blunder here. Probably we ought to read <q>subordinatâ;</q> yet, even so, the
phrase is not very intelligible. We have judged of the sense intended, by
the context.</note> since it is not
lawful to deny even a capital crime if the accused is questioned
juridically. He asked me, therefore, what I considered a juridical
questioning. I answered that the questioners must be really
superiors and judges in the matter under examination; then, the
matter itself must be some crime hurtful to the common weal,
in order that it may come under their jurisdiction; for sins
merely internal were reserved for God's judgment. Again, there
must be some trustworthy testimony brought against the
accused; thus, it is the custom in England that all who are put
<pb n='ccxvi'/><anchor id='Pgccxvi'/>
on their trial, when first asked by the Judge if they are guilty
or not, answer, <q>Not guilty,</q> before any witness is brought
against them, or any verdict found by the jury; and though
they answer the same way, whether really guilty or not, yet no
one accuses them of lying. Therefore I laid down this general
principle, that no one is allowed to use equivocation except in
the case when something is asked him, either actually or virtually,
which the questioner has no right to ask, and the declaration of
which will turn to his own hurt, if he answers according to the
intention of the questioner. I showed that this had been our
Lord's practice, and that of the Saints. I showed that it was
the practice of all prudent men, and would certainly be followed
by my interrogators themselves in case they were asked about
some secret sin, for example, or were asked by robbers where
their money was hid.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They asked me, therefore, when our Lord ever made use
of equivocations; to which I replied, <q>When He told His
Apostles that no one knew the Day of Judgment, not even the
Son of Man; and again, when He said that He was not going
up to the Festival at Jerusalem, and yet He went; yea, and
He knew that He should go when He said He would not.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Wade here interrupted me, saying, <q>Christ really did not
know the Day of Judgment, as Son of Man.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>It cannot be,</q> said I, <q>that the Word of God Incarnate,
and with a human nature hypostatically united to God, should
be subject to ignorance; nor that He Who was appointed
Judge by God the Father should be ignorant of those facts
which belonged necessarily to His office; nor that He should
be of infinite wisdom, and yet not know what intimately concerned
Himself.</q> In fact, these heretics do not practically admit
what the Apostle teaches (though they boast of following his
doctrines), namely, that all the fulness of the Divinity resided
corporally in Christ, and that in Him were all the treasures of
the wisdom and knowledge of God. It did not, however, occur
to me at the moment to adduce this passage of St. Paul.</q>
</p>

<p>
In every one of these instances words are carefully introduced
to show that the denials in question were uttered not with the
intent of deceiving the hearers (though even that, according to
<pb n='ccxvii'/><anchor id='Pgccxvii'/>
the grave Protestant authorities recently quoted, would have been
lawful), nor of allowing them to deceive themselves if they did
not choose to advert to the circumstances in which the denials
were made (as Catholic divines would have permitted);<note place='foot'>Sir Walter Scott's words have been often quoted, and they are fair
specimens of what an honourable man considers lawful. As they were no
hasty and unconsidered expressions, they are deserving of insertion in this
place. Lockhart calls them <q>a style of equivoque which could never seriously
be misunderstood.</q> To John Murray Scott wrote: <q>I give you heartily joy
of the success of the Tales, although I do not claim that paternal interest in
them which my friends do me the credit to assign me. I assure you I have
never read a volume of them until they were printed, and can only join with
the rest of the world in applauding the true and striking portraits which they
present of old Scottish manners. I do not expect implicit reliance to be placed
on my disavowal, because I know very well that he who is disposed not to own
a work must necessarily deny it, and that otherwise his secret would be at the
mercy of all who choose to ask the question, since silence in such a case must
always pass for consent, or rather assent. But I have a mode of convincing
you that I am perfectly serious in my denial&mdash;pretty similar to that by which
Solomon distinguished the fictitious from the real mother&mdash;and that is, by
reviewing the work, which I take to be an operation equal to that of quartering
the child.</q> And, in a letter written two years later, he says: <q>I own I did
mystify Mrs. &mdash;&mdash; a little about the report you mention; and I am glad to hear
the finesse succeeded. She came up to me with a great overflow of gratitude
for the delight and pleasure, and so forth, which she owed to me on account of
these books. Now, as she knew very well that I had never owned myself the
author, this was not <emph>polite</emph> politeness, and she had no right to force me up into
a corner and compel me to tell her a word more than I chose, upon a subject
which concerned no one but myself&mdash;and I have no notion of being pumped by
any old dowager Lady of Session, male or female. So I gave in dilatory
defences, under protestation to add and eik; for I trust, in learning a new
slang, you have not forgot the old. In plain words, I denied the charge, and
as she insisted to know who else <emph>could</emph> write these novels, I suggested Adam
Fergusson as a person having all the information and capacity necessary for
that purpose. But the inference that he <emph>was</emph> the author was of her own
deducing; and thus ended her attempt, notwithstanding her having primed the
pump with a good dose of flattery</q> (Lockhart's <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of Sir Walter Scott</hi>,
1844, pp. 338, 389).</note> but
avowedly in order that they might not be available as legal
evidence against the speaker or his friends.
</p>

<p>
To Father Gerard's defence of himself it may be as well to
add that of Father Southwell,<note place='foot'>We translate partly from Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, lib. v., c. 9, and partly
from More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, lib. v., c. 29.</note> who was assailed by Sir Edward
Coke.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Father would have spoken further on this point [obedience
to the laws] had they not attacked him on another,</q>
<pb n='ccxviii'/><anchor id='Pgccxviii'/>
objecting to him a statement of Anne Bellamy's, who deposed
that Father Robert had instructed her, that if asked by searchers
or persecutors if there was a Priest in the house, she could say
<q>No,</q> though she knew there was one: nay, that if asked on oath,
she could swear there was not. No sooner was this brought out
than the Judges and officers of the court showed themselves
highly scandalized, and were for stopping their ears:<note place='foot'>Father Bartoli here asks us to contrast the pious horror expressed by the
officials at Father Southwell's doctrine with the fact related by Father Gerard
(<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pglxvii'>lxvii</ref>.) of the magistrate Young swearing on the Scriptures to what
he knew to be false, that Father Southwell had expressed a desire to confer
with a Protestant minister with the view of abandoning the Catholic faith.</note> as if, forsooth,
the seeking for Catholic Priests to put them to a traitor's
death, or force them to apostatize, were a proceeding so clearly
and so indubitably just, as to make it as clearly and indubitably
unjust to hide them from such an ordeal, or to deny them to
their pursuers: nor, indeed, would the harm be confined to the
cruel execution of the Priest, but with him the whole of the
family in whose house he was found would be liable to the same
death of traitors. Coke, therefore, the Attorney General, made
the most he could of this matter, insisting that such a pernicious
doctrine tended to destroy all truth, and all reliance of men
in each other's veracity, and if allowed to prevail, would upset
all good government. Topcliffe also inveighed against it so
exorbitantly, that Judge Popham silenced him. Father Robert
then, as soon as he was allowed to reply, explained briefly what
he had said to the witness, whose statement was not altogether
exact, and addressing the Judge, said:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>If you will have the patience to listen to me, I shall be
able to prove to you from the Holy Scriptures, from the Fathers,
from theologians, and from reason, that in case a demand is
made against justice and with the view of doing grievous harm
to an innocent person, to give an answer not according to the
intent of the questioner is no offence against either the divine
law or the natural law. Nay, I will prove that this doctrine in
no wise threatens the good government of states and kingdoms:
and that, where the other necessary conditions of an oath are
present, there is nothing wrong in confirming such an answer in
that manner. Now I ask you, Mr. Attorney, Supposing the
<pb n='ccxix'/><anchor id='Pgccxix'/>
King of France (which God forbid) were to invade this country
successfully, and having obtained full possession of this city, were
to make search for Her Majesty the Queen, whom you knew to
be hidden in a secret apartment of the palace: supposing,
moreover, that you were seized in the palace and brought before
the King, and that he asked you where the Queen was, and
would receive no profession of ignorance from you except on
oath: what would you do? To palter or hesitate is to show
that she is there: to refuse to swear is equivalent to a betrayal.
What would you answer? I suppose, forsooth, you would point
out the place! Yet who of all who now hear me would not cry
out upon you for a traitor? You would then, if you had any
sense, swear at once, either that you knew not where she was,
or that you knew she was not in the palace, in order that your
knowledge might not become instrumental to her harm. Of this
kind, in fact, was the answer of Christ in the Gospel, when He
said that concerning the Day of Judgment no one had any
knowledge, neither the Angels in Heaven, nor the Son: that is,
according to the interpretation of the Fathers, such knowledge
that He could communicate to others. Now this is the condition
of Catholics in England: they are in peril of their liberty,
their fortunes, and their lives, if they should have a Priest in
their houses. How can it be forbidden them to escape these
evils by an equivocal answer, and to confirm this answer, if
necessary, by an oath? For in such a case, three things must
be remembered: first, that a wrong is done unless you swear;
secondly, that no one is obliged to answer everybody's questions
about everything; thirdly, that an oath is always lawful, if made
with truth, with judgment, and with justice, all which are found
in this case.</q><note place='foot'>This last consideration applies, of course, not to the general question of
equivocation (for in that case it would involve a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio principii</foreign>), but to the
sub-question whether supposing a simple equivocation lawful (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, allowing it
to be no violation of veracity in some cases), it could ever be lawful to add
to it the confirmation of an oath. Father Southwell maintains reasonably,
that whatever it is lawful to say, it is lawful also to swear to, provided the
other conditions for an oath are present.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He went on to exemplify his position by supposed queries of
robbers and highwaymen; but he was interrupted by abuse.</q>
</p>

<pb n='ccxx'/><anchor id='Pgccxx'/>

<p>
Father Garnett has defended himself at sufficient length in
his speech on his trial;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</note> but as he there refers to his previous
answers, we have thought it best to give insertion here to an
autograph paper of his preserved in the Public Record Office.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 217<hi rend='smallcaps'>A</hi>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Concerning equivocation, which I seemed to condemn in
moral things, my meaning was in moral and human conversation,
in which the virtue of verity is required among friends, for otherwise
it were injurious to all humanity. Neither is equivocation
at all to be justified, but in case of necessary defence from
injustice or wrong, or the obtaining some good of great importance,
when there is no danger of harm to others, as in the case
of Coventry,<note place='foot'>Cowetry (MS.). If this word is read thus correctly, it is a curious proof
of the antiquity of the phrase <q>being sent to Coventry.</q></note> wherein I suppose it is a great advantage to me
for to be admitted, and no harm can ensue to the city. For the
city seeketh nothing but to be free from the sickness, and if it
were possible that the city knew me to be free of certainty, they
would admit me presently, which is confirmed by the custom of
places beyond [sea], where, though they know a man to come
from a place infected, yet after they have kept him in some
several place, with convenient diet, for forty days, they admit him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As for Mr. Tresham's equivocation, I am loath to judge; yet
I think ignorance might excuse him, because he might think it
lawful in that case to equivocate for the excuse of his friend, yet
would I be loath to allow of it or practise it: he being not then
urged, but voluntarily offering it himself, contrary to that which
he had before set down, and especially being in case of manifest
treason, as I will after explain. But in case a man be urged at
the hour of his death, it is lawful for to equivocate, <emph>with such
due circumstances as are required in his life</emph>. An example we may
bring in another matter. For the divines hold that in some cases
a man may be bound to conceal <emph>something in his confession</emph>,
because of some great harm which may ensue of it. And as he
may do so in his life, so may he at his death, if the danger of the
harm continue still.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The case being propounded, supposing that I knew Gerard
<pb n='ccxxi'/><anchor id='Pgccxxi'/>
acquainted with this treason, and having been often demanded
thereof, I still denying it, by way of equivocation, whether at the
hour of my death, either natural or by course of justice, I may by
equivocation seek to clear him again.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I answer, that in case I be not urged I may not, but I must
leave the matter in case in which it stand; but if I be urged, then
I may clear him by equivocation, whereas otherwise my silence
would be accounted an accusation. But all this I understand
when the case is such that I am bound to conceal Gerard's
treason, as if I had heard it in confession. For this is a general
rule, that in cases of true and manifest treason,<note place='foot'><p><q>One necessary condition,</q> says Father Garnett in another paper
(P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. 20, n. 2), <q rend='pre'>required in every law is that it
be just. For if this condition be wanting, that the law be unjust, then is it
<foreign rend='italic'>ipso facto</foreign> void and of no force, neither hath it any power to oblige any. And
this is a maxim, not only of divines, but of Aristotle and all philosophers.
Hereupon ensueth that no power on earth can forbid or punish any action
which we are bound unto by the law of God, which is the true pattern of all
justice. So that the laws against recusants, against receiving of Priests, against
confession, against Mass, or other rites of Catholic religion, are to be esteemed
as no laws by such as steadfastly believe these to be necessary observances of
the true religion.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Likewise Almighty God hath absolute right for to send His preachers of
His Gospel to any place in the world. <q>Euntes decete omnes gentes.</q> So
that the law against Priests coming into the realm sincerely to preach, is no
law, and those that are put to death by virtue of that decree are verily martyrs
because they die for the preaching of true religion.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Being asked what I meant by true treason, I answer that that is a true
treason which is made treason by any just law, and that is no treason at all
which is made treason by an unjust law.</q></p></note> a man is bound
voluntarily in utter and very truth by no way to equivocate, if he
know it not by way of confession, in which case also he is bound
to seek all lawful ways to discover, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>salvo sigillo</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>Henry Garnett.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>29° Martii.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>All the Doctors that hold equivocation to be lawful do
maintain that it is not lawful when the examinate is bound to
tell the simple truth, that is, according to the civil law, when
there is a competent judge, and the cause subject to his jurisdiction,
and sufficient proofs. But in case of treason a man is
bound to confess of another without any witness at all, yea,
voluntarily to disclose it; not so of himself.</q>
</p>

<pb n='ccxxii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And how far the common law bindeth in cases that are not
treason a man to confess of himself, I know not. In the civil
law, it is sufficient to have <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>semiplenam probationem</foreign>, that is, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unum
testem omni exceptione majorem</foreign>, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>manifesta indicia</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Our law I take to be more mild, and that a man may put all
to witnesses without confessing, except in cases of treason. For,
according to our law, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non pervertitur judicium tacendo vel negando</foreign>,
as in the civil law, where is required <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reus confitens</foreign>. But generally,
when a man is bound to confess, there is no place of equivocation.
And when he is not bound to confess according to the laws of
each country, then may he equivocate.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
In the last paper Father Garnett is not speaking of equivocation
used in defence of an innocent person, but of what we
may call the persistent plea of <q>Not guilty,</q> and he there draws
an interesting distinction between the Roman civil law and our
own, which he calls <q>more mild,</q> in that it professed to regard
a prisoner as innocent till he is proved to be guilty. Happily
this is our practice now, as well as our profession, and our
quotations are needed to enable us to form judgments of conduct
in times that have happily passed away.
</p>

<p>
But with regard to the trustworthiness of Father John
Gerard's evidence, as we have it before us in his Narrative of
the Gunpowder Plot, even if the lawfulness of his proceedings
were not admitted, all that we are concerned to show is, that
untrue statements, made by a man under circumstances which,
rightly or wrongly, he considers to justify him in making them,
furnish no presumption whatever that, under other circumstances,
affording to his conscience no such justification, his word cannot
be trusted. It is an evident instance of the maxim that the
exception proves the rule. Restraining himself carefully within
the limits of what he held to be lawful under circumstances of
extreme difficulty and great personal danger, are we not rather to
conclude that, under far less pressure, he will as carefully confine
himself to the laws imposed by his conscience? Clearly there is
nothing in Father Gerard's practice under examination to cause
us to hesitate in placing implicit trust in his word when he speaks
as an historian; and, in addition, we are sure that no one will rise
<pb n='ccxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxiii'/>
from the perusal of the exculpatory letters which we propose to
subjoin, without a full conviction of his innocence and truthfulness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXXI.</head>

<p>
But before we close this subject by producing these letters, we
think it desirable to answer in detail two particular accusations
that have been brought against Father Gerard's veracity by a
modern writer. Canon Tierney says:<note place='foot'>Dodd's <hi rend='italic'>Church History</hi>, ed. Tierney, vol. iv., p. 44, note.</note> <q>To show how very little
reliance can be placed on the asseverations of Gerard when
employed in his own vindication, it is only right to observe that,
referring to this transaction</q> [the Communion of the conspirators
after their oath of secresy] <q>in his manuscript narrative, he first
boldly and very properly asserts, on the authority of Winter's
confession, that the Priest who administered the Sacrament was
not privy to the designs of the conspirators; and then ignorant of
Faukes' declaration which had not been published, and supposing
that his name had not transpired, as that of the Clergyman who
had officiated upon the occasion, he returns at once to the
artifice which I have elsewhere noticed, of substituting a third
person as the narrator, and solemnly protests on his salvation that
he knows not the Priest from whom Catesby and his associates
received the Communion!</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. Lingard also says simply that the Communion was
received by the conspirators <q>from the hand of the Jesuit
missionary Father Gerard,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>History of England</hi>, ed. 1849, vol. vii., p. 44.</note> apparently unconscious that he had
ever denied it.
</p>

<p>
We have little doubt that the house in which the oath of
secrecy was taken and holy Communion received, was really
Father Gerard's house. The <q>house in the fields behind St.
Clement's Inn,</q> as Faulks calls it; <q>behind St. Clement's,</q> as
it appears in Winter's confession, seems to be the house described
by Father Gerard as that which he occupied up to the time of the
Powder Plot, <q>nearer the principal street in London, called the
Strand,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgclxii'>clxii</ref>.</note> in which street most of his friends lived. But he was
not the only Priest who lived in that house. At least two other
<pb n='ccxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgccxxiv'/>
Priests<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> pp. <ref target='Pgclxxiv'>clxxiv</ref>., <ref target='Pgclxxvii'>clxxvii</ref>.</note> resided habitually with him. One was Father Strange,
who was in the Tower when the Autobiography was written; the
other, whose name he does not give, <q>was thrown into Bridewell,
and was afterwards banished, together with other Priests.</q> Then
there was also Thomas Laithwaite,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgclxxvi'>clxxvi</ref>.</note> who afterwards became a
Jesuit, who frequented the house if he did not live there. Father
Gerard says, <q>There I should long have remained, free from all
peril or even suspicion, if some friends of mine, while I was
absent from London, had not availed themselves of the house
rather rashly.</q> What meaning can this have but that Catholics
were allowed, in Father Gerard's absence, to come to the house
too freely to receive the Sacraments, so that it became too widely
known that it was his house?
</p>

<p>
Immediately after binding themselves by oath to secrecy, the
minds of the conspirators must have been preoccupied with the
thoughts of the tremendous undertaking to which they had just
pledged themselves; and it is very unlikely that mention should
be made, in subsequent conversation among them, of the name
of the Priest, whom they had only seen at the altar, especially as
he <q>was not acquainted with their purpose.</q><note place='foot'>Faulks' confession, P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 54.</note> The only two
conspirators who mention Father Gerard's name are Faulks and
Thomas Winter. Faulks was a stranger, who had <q>spent most of
his time in the wars of Flanders, which is the cause that he was
less known here in England.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>.</note> We have no trace of any personal
intercourse between Thomas Winter and Father Gerard. What
can have been more natural than that they should have been told
to meet at Father Gerard's house, and that those who did not
know him by sight should have concluded that it was Father
Gerard's Mass that they heard? It surely is more probable that
they should have been mistaken in a name than that Father
Gerard should have been guilty of perjury in contradicting, from
a place of safety, that which was no accusation against him, but a
harmless statement that, in ignorance of the oath taken, he had
given Communion to certain Catholics.
</p>

<pb n='ccxxv'/><anchor id='Pgccxxv'/>

<p>
Faulks' confession was extorted by torture. King James had
given orders, <q>The gentler tortours are to be first usid unto him,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et sic per gradus ad ima tenditur</foreign>, and so God speede your goode
work.</q><note place='foot'>In the King's own hand. P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 17.</note> Faulks was under none of the <q>gentler tortures</q> when
in a tremulous hand he wrote <q>Guido</q> on that declaration.
<q>The prisoner is supposed to have fainted before completing</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Calendar of State Papers</hi>, by M. E. Green. James I., 1603-10, p. 247.</note>
the signature. Before the words exculpating Father Gerard from
all knowledge of the conspirators' purpose, the word <hi rend='italic'>Hucusque</hi>
appears in the handwriting of Sir Edward Coke, who has underlined
the sentence in red. The ideas of justice of this great
lawyer permitted him to publish the mention there made of
Father Gerard's name, and to suppress the statement of his
innocence. There is also a red line drawn beneath the following
words in Thomas Winter's examination: <q>But Gerard knew not
of the provision of the powder, to his knowledge.</q><note place='foot'>P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 164.</note>
</p>

<p>
The second accusation brought by the same writer,<note place='foot'>Dodd's <hi rend='italic'>Church History</hi>, by Tierney, vol. iv., p. cii.</note> is
couched as follows: <q>Relying upon the fidelity of Gerard, who
declares <emph>upon his conscience</emph>, that he has <q>set down Father
Garnett's words truly and sincerely as they lie in his letter,</q>
Dr. Lingard has printed what is given by that writer, and from it
has argued, with Greenway, that Garnett on the 4th of October,
the date assigned to it both by Gerard and Greenway, was still
ignorant of the nature of the Plot. The truth, however, is, that
although the <emph>letter</emph> was written on the <emph>fourth</emph>, the <emph>postcript</emph> was not
added until the <emph>twenty-first</emph> of October; that from this postscript
the two Jesuit writers have selected a sentence, which they have
transferred to the body of the letter; and then, concealing both
the existence of the postscript and the date of the 21st,
have represented the whole as written and dispatched on the
4th. The motive for this proceeding, especially on the part of
Greenway, is obvious. That writer's argument is, that the
Parliament had been summoned to meet on the 3rd of October,
that Garnett had not heard of the intention to prorogue it to the
following month (this, to say the least, is very improbable); that,
<pb n='ccxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgccxxvi'/>
for anything he could have known to the contrary, the great blow
had already been struck, at the very time when he was writing;
and, consequently, that, had he been acquainted with the intentions
of Catesby and his confederates, he would never, at such a
moment, have thought of proceeding, as he says he was about to
proceed, towards London, and thus exposing himself to the
almost inevitable danger of falling into the hands of his enemies....
Now the whole of this reasoning is founded on the assumption
that the letter bore only the single date of the 4th. On the
21st, the supposed danger of a journey to London no longer
existed. At that period, too, Garnett, instead of proceeding
towards the metropolis, had not only removed in the opposite
direction, from Goathurst, in Buckinghamshire, to Harrowden,
the seat of Lord Vaux, in Northamptonshire, but was also
preparing to withdraw himself still further from the capital, and by
the end of the month, was actually at Coughton, in the neighbourhood
of Alcester. In fact, what was written on the 4th, he had
practically contradicted on the 21st, and to have allowed any part
of the letter, therefore, to carry this later date, would have been
to supply the refutation of the very argument which it was
intended to support. Hence the expedient to which this writer
has had recourse. The postscript and its date are carefully
suppressed; and we are told that, looking at the contents of the
letter, Garnett, when he wrote it, could have known nothing of
the designs of the conspirators: <q>Quando scrisse questa lettera,
che fu alli quattro d'Ottobre, non sapeva niente del disegno di
questi gentilhuomini, altro che il sospetto che prima havea
havuto</q> (Greenway's MS., 51b). Without stopping to notice the
falsehood contained in the concluding words of this sentence, and
without intending to offer an opinion here, as to the principal
question of Garnett's conduct, I may still remark that even the
friends of that Jesuit universally admit him to have received the
details of the plot from Greenway about the 21st; and that this
fact alone may be regarded as supplying another and a sufficient
motive both to the latter and to Gerard, for the suppression of
that date.</q>
</p>

<p>
This note by Canon Tierney produced its effect on Dr.
Lingard, and that historian, in the edition of his work published
<pb n='ccxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxvii'/>
in 1849, remarks upon the matter as follows.<note place='foot'>Vol. viii., p. 543.</note> <q>The object for
which this letter was made up in the shape which it thus assumes
in Gerard's MS., is plain from the reasoning which both he and
Greenway found upon it. They contend that, if Garnett had
been privy to the conspiracy, he must have believed on the 4th
that the explosion had already taken place on the 3rd, the day
on which the Parliament had been summoned to meet; though
no reason is assigned why he might not, as well as others, have
been aware of the prorogation to the 5th of November, and
they add that, under such belief, he would never have resolved
to encounter the dangers of making, as he proposed to do, a
journey to London, though in fact he made no such journey,
but changed his route, and was actually, at the time in which
he wrote, on his way to the meeting appointed at Dunchurch.
Hence it became necessary to suppress the postscript, because
it was irreconcileable with such statements. There was, moreover,
this benefit in the suppression, that it kept the reader in
ignorance (1) of the real date of the letter, the 21st of October,
the very time when it is admitted that Greenway made to
Garnett a full disclosure of the Plot; and (2) that Garnett
took that opportunity of blotting out a most important passage
in the letter written on the 4th, with a promise to forward the
same passage later in an epistle apart; two facts which would
furnish strong presumptions against the alleged innocence of the
Provincial.</q>
</p>

<p>
One word in passing, in reply to the <q>two facts which would
furnish strong presumptions against</q> Father Garnett's innocence.
1. Dr. Lingard has forgotten that <q>the full disclosure of the
Plot</q> was made in confession, and that Father Garnett could
make no use of it in any way, until the conjuncture arose when
the penitent gave him leave. 2. It is true that a passage,
written to Father Persons on the 4th October, was erased by
Father Garnett on the 21st; but what presumption does this
furnish? The <q>promise to forward the same passage later in
an epistle apart,</q> could not mean that he would write him word
of the Powder Plot when it was safe to do so. Is it likely that
a conspirator would have written to his friend, with all the
<pb n='ccxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxviii'/>
chances of a letter being intercepted, that they were proposing
to blow up the Houses of Parliament? What would he have
gained even had he but risked a phrase as oracular as that of
the letter to Lord Mounteagle? Such a supposition assumes
that Father Garnett was not only guilty of the Plot, but that
he had lost all common sense and ordinary caution; and that
he was indebted to the accidental return of his letter to his
hands, seventeen days after he had written it, for an opportunity
of destroying proof under his own hand that he was guilty. If
this consideration is not conclusive, we have but to refer to the
context, as given from the original by Mr. Tierney himself,<note place='foot'>Tierney's <hi rend='italic'>Dodd</hi>, vol. iv., p. cv. The original letter is now in the
archives of the Archbishop of Westminster.</note> and
our sense of the ridiculous must settle the question. Father
Garnett must have been the most erratic of letter-writers, if he
could insert a reference to the Gunpowder Treason, or to any
other treason, between two such subjects as the choice of
Lay-brothers and his own want of money. The letter ends
as follows.
</p>

<p>
<q><q>I pray you send word how many Coadjutors</q></q> [Jesuit Lay-brothers]
<q rend='pre'><q>you will have. I have one, a citizen of London,
of very good experience, which may benefit us, in buying and
selling without taxes. But he is fifty years old: and I think
it not amiss to have, at the first, some ancient men for such.
Send your will herein.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>A short but separate paragraph of three lines is here carefully
obliterated.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>I am in wonderful distress, for want of the ordinary allowance
from Joseph</q></q> [Creswell, the Superior in Spain]. <q><q>I pray
you write for all the arrearages, which, if it may all be gotten,
I can spare you some. Thus, with humble remembrance to
Claud</q></q> [Aquaviva, the General], <q><q>Fabio, Perez, Duras, and the
rest, I cease, 4<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> Octobris.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
But let us address ourselves to the grave accusation made
against Gerard and Greenway. That Dr. Lingard should have
made such a statement at all is owing, first, to the fact that at
the time when he was preparing the new edition of his History,
he had no longer access to the manuscript of Father Gerard,
<pb n='ccxxix'/><anchor id='Pgccxxix'/>
of which he had had the use<note place='foot'>Vol. iii., p. 37, note.</note> when originally compiling his
work. The reader, who has Gerard's Narrative now beneath
his eyes, can speedily convince himself of this fact. And,
secondly, to a misunderstanding of Canon Tierney's note, for
which that writer's expressions are to blame. If it had been
true, as Dr. Lingard understood Mr. Tierney to say, that Gerard
and Greenway drew the same argument from the date of Father
Garnett's letter, their conduct would have been entirely indefensible,
and they would have deserved the blame brought against
them.
</p>

<p>
The truth however is, and in this lies an ample defence
for both of them, that this is not so. Father Gerard quotes
Father Garnett's letter only and solely to illustrate the state of
the Catholics in England. For this purpose, the date of the
letter he was quoting was entirely unimportant. Indeed, he
originally quoted the letter without any date; and then he
interlined the date of Oct. 4th, but laying no more stress upon
it than he had laid on the dates of the other letters of July 24th
and August 28th. For the same reason it would not occur to
him to note that the passage respecting Ireland was taken from
a postcript. It was enough for him that he gave Father Garnett's
very words, as he declared <q>upon his conscience</q> that he did;
and that he had Father Garnett's authority for the account that
he was giving of the condition and state of feeling of Catholics.
When he turned to the letter for a date, it was natural enough
that he should take that which was endorsed upon it by Father
Persons, who, having erased the date of the 21st which he had
originally written upon it, had substituted the 4th, and <q>in
another corner of the paper also, where it appears most likely
to catch the eye, inscribed the same date thus, <q>4° 8<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>bris</hi>.</q></q><note place='foot'>Tierney's Dodd, vol. iv., p. cvi.</note> As
there is no ground for blaming Father Persons for thus endorsing
a single date on a letter which continued to bear two, so neither
is it reasonable to blame Father Gerard for quoting the letter
under one date only. It is clear, therefore, that there is no
accusation whatever against Father Gerard, and if Father
Greenway had not drawn from the date of the letter the argument
regarding Father Garnett, none would ever have been
<pb n='ccxxx'/><anchor id='Pgccxxx'/>
made. It is gravely to be regretted that Mr. Tierney should
have said that there was <q>a sufficient motive both to the latter
<emph>and to Gerard</emph> for the suppression of that date.</q> This expression
evidently misled Dr. Lingard, and led him erroneously to speak
of <q>the reasoning which both he [Gerard] and Greenway found
upon it.</q> Had Dr. Lingard not trusted to Mr. Tierney, but
referred to Gerard's Narrative, he would have said of the
whole charge that which he has said<note place='foot'>Vol. vii., p. 542.</note> of the alterations of names
in the first part of the letter. Of this his expression is, <q>Had
his object been only to present the public with an account of
the persecution to which the English Catholics were at that
moment subjected, there would not have been great cause to
complain.</q> This <emph>was</emph> his only object,<note place='foot'>See Narrative, <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</note> and therefore there was,
in Dr. Lingard's judgment, no great cause to complain.
</p>

<p>
Father Greenway derived his information of the letter from
Father Gerard's Narrative, of which he was translator. Whether
the argument he has founded on the date of the letter has any
and what force is not here under discussion, but it is evident that
he propounded it in good faith. The original letter was in
existence to confute him. If he had seen it or noticed the
postscript and its date, he would never have exposed himself to
such a confutation. He was misled, innocently enough, but
seriously, by the manner in which the letter appeared in Father
Gerard's pages which he was translating.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the accusation is this. Gerard and Greenway
found an argument on the fact that a letter of Garnett's was
dated the 4th of October, when they knew that it was in his
hands on the 21st. And the answer is this. Gerard may have
known, but had no need to notice, the fact of the double date, as
he founded no argument whatever upon it: Greenway, who did
found an argument on it, had no reason for suspecting the
existence of a later date on the letter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ccxxxi'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxi'/>

<div>
<head>XXXII.</head>

<p>
Having thus vindicated the fair fame of these Fathers from the
unmerited imputations brought against them, it remains for us to
produce the letters which were written expressly to prove Father
Gerard's innocence of all complicity with the conspiracy. We
first take from the Public Record Office<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Domestic, James I.</hi>, vol. xviii., n. 35.</note> his letter to the Duke of
Lenox, enclosing letters to the Earl of Salisbury and Sir Everard
Digby. These are the letters described by Father Gerard himself
in the twelfth chapter of his Narrative.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pgclxxix'>clxxix</ref>; <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Right Honourable,&mdash;Seeing all laws, both divine and
human, do license the innocent to plead for himself, and the same
laws do strictly require and highly commend an open ear in any
of authority to give audience and equal trial to a plaintiff in such
a case, my hope is that your Grace will excuse this my boldness
in offering up by your hands my humble petition for trial of my
innocence touching the late most impious treason, whereof I am
wrongfully accused, by some lost companions, I assure me, who,
to save themselves from deserved punishment, will not stick to
accuse any innocent of any crime wherein their bare word may
pass for proof. There is none so innocent but may be wrongfully
accused, sith innocency itself in our Lord and Master was
accused and condemned as an enemy to the State and no friend
to Cæsar. The servant must not look to be more free from
wrongs than his Master was. But happy is that man by whom
the truth is tried in judgment and innocency cleared.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I durst not presume, being branded with the odious name of
traitor, to offer my petition to my Sovereign (to whom, as God is
witness, I wish long life and all happiness as to my own soul).
But if by your Grace's means (of whose piety and worthy disposition
I have heard so much good) the humble suit of a
distressed suppliant (prostrate at His Majesty's feet) may be
offered up, I hope it shall be found not unfit for your Grace to
offer, and most fit and reasonable for so wise and righteous a
Prince to grant.</q>
</p>

<pb n='ccxxxii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxii'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My humble petition is only this. That, whereas I have
protested before God and the world, I was not privy to that
horrible Plot of destroying the King's Majesty and his posterity,
&amp;c., by powder (wherewith I am now so publicly taxed in the
proclamation), that full trial may be made, whether I be guilty
therein or not. And if so it be proved, that then all shame
and pain may light upon me; but if the truth appear on the
contrary side, that then I may be cleared from this so grievous an
infamation and punishment not deserved. Two kinds of proofs
may be made in this cause, which I humbly beseech your Grace,
for God's cause, may be performed. One is, that all the principal
conspirators (with whom I am said to have practised the foresaid
Plot of Powder against the Parliament House) may be asked at
their death, as they will answer at the dreadful tribunal unto
which they are going, whether ever they did impart the matter to
me, or I practise the same with them in the least degree, or
whether they can but say of their knowledge that I did know of
it. And I know it will then appear that no one of them will
accuse me, if it be not apparent they do it in hope of life, but do
give signs that they die in the fear of God and hope of their
salvation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And as by this trial it will appear (in this time most fit for
saying truth) that there is not sufficient witness against me, so I
humbly desire also trial may be made by examining a witness,
who can, if he will, fully clear me, and I hope he will not deny
me that right, especially being<note place='foot'>Here the paper is torn, and three or four words are consequently illegible.</note> ... the place of right and
justice himself. Sir Everard Digby can testify for me, how
ignorant I was of any such matter but two days before that
unnatural parricide should have been practised. I have, for full
trial thereof, enclosed a letter unto him, which I humbly beseech
may be delivered before your Grace and the other two lords,
whose favour and equity I have likewise humbly entreated by
these letters unto them. All which I am bold to direct unto your
Grace's hands, presuming upon your gracious furtherance, not
having other means, in this my distressed case, to have them
severally delivered. God of His goodness will reward, I hope, in
full measure, this your Grace's favour and pity showed to an
<pb n='ccxxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxiii'/>
innocent wrongly accused, who would rather suffer any death
than not to be found ever faithful to God and his Sovereign,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>John Gerard.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This 23rd of January.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Addressed</hi>&mdash;<q>To the Right Honourable the Duke of Lenox,
these deliver.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed in Cecil's hand</hi>&mdash;<q>Gerard the Jesuit to the Duke of
Lenox.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Right Honourable,&mdash;Although I can expect no other from
one in your place, but that you should permit the course of justice
to proceed against any that are proved guilty of treason to His
Majesty and the State, especially in so foul and unnatural a
treason as was lately discovered, yet I cannot but hope where
there is so much wisdom, and so vigilant a care for the preservation
of this State, your lordship will also be pleased to hear,
and forward to make trial, who may be wrongfully accused,
knowing right well that it is as necessary in any Government to
protect the innocent as to punish the offenders.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What proof there is of my accusation I know not, and
therefore cannot answer it. But this I know: that none can truly
produce the least proof that ever I was made privy to that
treason of which I am accused, and much less a practiser with
the principal conspirators in the same, as I am denounced to be.
Therefore, sith I know not my accusers, God I hope will be
judge between them and me, to Whom I refer my cause, and in
Whom my trust is, and ever shall be, that He will right me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the meantime my humble request is, that your lordship,
who have been so often seen to be pitiful towards any in distress,
and a potent helper to those who were oppressed (a special
ornament in so eminent a person, and much commended and
rewarded by God Himself), will show your accustomed commiseration
in my case, and afford me therein such audience as may be
sufficient to make trial of my innocency. Wherein your lordship
shall imitate the just proceeding of the highest Lord, from Whom
both yourself, and all that govern, have all your power. For God
Himself, although He know all things before He call us to
account, yet, to give us the form of just proceeding, is said in
<pb n='ccxxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxiv'/>
Holy Scripture to be ever careful in hearing what the accused can
say for himself before He proceeds to give sentence. So we read
that God said to Abraham, <q>Clamor Sodomorum etc., multiplicatus
est, etc., descendam et videbo utrum clamorem qui venit ad me
opere compleverint, an non est ita, ut sciam.</q> So again in the
Gospel when He heard a complaint against His steward, He
would not proceed against him without full audience, but called
him and said, <q>Quid hæc audio de te? redde rationem
villicationis tuae.</q> These most high and worthy examples I trust
your lordship will follow in my case, as you have been known to
do with others. And then I doubt not but that shall appear true
which I have most sincerely protested before God and the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>My humble petition therefore is, that a witness may be
asked his knowledge who is well able to clear me if he will, and I
hope he will not be so unjust in this time of his own danger as to
conceal so needful a proof being so demanded of him. Sir Everard
Digby doth well know how far I was from knowledge of any such
matter but two days before the treason was known to all men. I
have therefore written a letter unto him, to require his testimony
of that which passed between him and me at that time. Wherein,
if I may have your lordship's furtherance to have just trial made
of the truth whilst yet he liveth, I shall ever esteem myself most
deeply bound to pray for your lordship's happiness both in this
world and in the next. In which hope I will rest, your lordship's
prone and humble suppliant, never to be proved false to King
and country,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='smallcaps'>John Gerard.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This 23rd of January.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Addressed</hi>&mdash;<q>To the Right Honourable the Earl of Salisbury,
Principal Secretary to His Majesty, these.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed in Cecil's hand</hi>&mdash;<q>Gerard the Jesuit to my son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Sir Everard Digby,&mdash;I presume so much of your sincerity
both to God and man, that I cannot fear you will be loath to utter
your knowledge for the clearing of one that is innocent from a
most unjust accusation, importing both loss of life to him that is
accused, and of his good name also, which he much more
esteemeth.</q>
</p>

<pb n='ccxxxv'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So it is that upon some false information (given, as I
suppose, by some base fellows, desirous to save their lives by the
loss of their honesty) there is come forth a proclamation against
my Superior, and one other of the Society, and myself, as against
three notorious practisers with divers of the principal conspirators
in this late most odious treason of destroying the King's Majesty
and all in the Parliament House with powder. And myself am
put in the first place, as the first or chiefest offender therein.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now God I call to witness, Who must be my Judge, that I
did never know of it before the rumour of the country brought it
to the place where I was, after the treason was publicly discovered.
And if this protestation be not sincerely true, without any equivocation,
and the words thereof so understood by me, as they sound
to others, I neither desire nor expect any favour at God's hand
when I shall stand before His tribunal. But because this
protestation doth only clear me in their opinion who are so
persuaded of my conscience that they think I would not condemn
my soul to save my body (which I hope by God's grace shall
never be my mind): therefore, to give more full proof of my
innocency to those also may doubt the truth of my words, I take
witness to yourself whether you, upon your certain knowledge,
cannot clear me. I wrote a letter before Christmas which I
hoped would be sufficient to have cleared me; wherein,
beside a most serious protestation (such as no honest man can
use if he were guilty, as for my part my conscience doth
persuade me), I alleged some other reasons which did make it
more than probable, in my opinion, that I was neither to be
charged with this late treason, nor chargeable with former dealing
in State matters. But I did of purpose forbear this proof (which
now I allege), although I did assure myself it would clear me
from all just suspicion of being privy to that last and greatest
treason; and I did forbear to set it down, in regard I would not
take knowledge of any personal acquaintance with you, especially
at your own house, not knowing how far you were to be touched
for your life, and therefore would not add unto your danger. But
now that it appears by your confession and trial in the country
that you stand at the King's mercy for greater matters than your
acquaintance with a Priest, I hope you will not be loath I should
<pb n='ccxxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxvi'/>
publish that which cannot hurt you, and may help myself in a
matter of such importance. And as I know you could never like
to stoop to so base and unworthy a humour as to flatter or
dissemble with any man, so much less can I fear that now (being
in the case you are in) you can ever think it fit to dissemble with
God, or not to utter your every knowledge, being required as from
Him, and in the behalf of truth. Therefore I desire you will bear
witness of the truth which followeth (if it be true that I affirm of
my demand to you, growing upon my ignorance in the matter
then in hand) as you expect truth and mercy at God's hand
hereafter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>First, I desire you to bear witness whether, coming to your
house upon All Souls' Day last, before dinner, with intention and
hope to celebrate there, and finding all things hid out of the way
and many of your household gone, you did not perceive me to be
astonished at it, as a thing much contrary to my expectation.
Whereupon I asked you what was become of them. And when
you told me you had sent them into Warwickshire, and your
hounds also, and yourself were going presently after, about a
hunting match which you had made, though I seemed satisfied
for the present because a stranger was there with you, yet
whether I did not soon after (when I had compared many
particulars together which seemed strange unto me) draw you
into a chamber apart, and there urge you to tell me what was the
reason both of that sudden alteration in your house and of divers
other things which I had observed before, but did not until then
reflect upon them so much, as, for example, the number of horses
that you had not long before in your stable, the sums of money
which I had been told you had made of your stock and grounds,
which (said I) in one of your judgment and provident care of
your estate, are not likely to be done without some great cause,
and seemed to think you had something in hand for the Catholic
cause. Your answer was, <q>No, there was nothing in hand that
you knew of, or could tell me of.</q> And when I replied that I had
some fear of it by those signs, considering you would not hurt
your estate so much in likelihood without some cause equivalent
(for I knew very well you meant to pay the statute, and so stood
not in fear of losing your stock), and therefore willed you to look
<pb n='ccxxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxvii'/>
well that you followed counsel in your proceedings, or else you
might hurt both yourself and the cause, your answer was (which
I have remembered often since), <q>That you respected the Catholic
cause much more than your own commodity, as it should well
appear whensoever you undertook anything.</q> I asked you once
again whether, then, there were anything to be done, and whether
you expected any help by foreign power, whereunto you answered,
holding up the end of your finger, that you would not adventure
so much in hope thereof. Then I said, <q>I pray God you follow
counsel in your doings. If there be any matter in hand, doth
Mr. Walley know of it?</q> You answered, <q>In truth, I think he
doth not.</q> Then I said further, <q>In truth, Sir Everard Digby, if
there should be anything in hand, and that you retire yourself
and company into Warwickshire, as into a place of most safety, I
should think you did not perform the part of a friend to some of
your neighbours not far off, and persons that, as you know,
deserve every respect, and to whom you have professed much
friendship, that they are left behind, and have not any warning to
make so much provision for their own safety as were needful in
such a time, but to defend themselves from rogues.</q> Your answer
was (as I will be sworn), <q>I warrant you it shall not need.</q> And
so you gave me assurance that, if there had been anything needful
for them or me to know, you would assuredly have told me. So I
rested satisfied and parted from you, and after that I never saw
you nor any of the conspirators. These were my questions unto
you. And thus clear I was from the knowledge of that Plot
against the Parliament House, whereof, notwithstanding, I am
accused and proclaimed to be a practiser with the principal
conspirators. But I refer me to God and your conscience, who
are able to clear me, and I challenge the conscience of any one
that certainly expecteth death, and desireth to die in the fear of
God and with hope of his salvation, to accuse me of it if he can.
God, of His mercy, grant unto us all grace to see and do His
will, and to live and die His servants, for they only are and shall
be happy for ever.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Your companion in tribulation though not in the cause,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>John Gerard.</hi></q>
</p>

<pb n='ccxxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxviii'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Postcript</hi>&mdash;<q>I hope you will also witness with me that you
have ever seen me much averted from such violent courses, and
hopeful rather of help by favour than by force. And, indeed, if
I had not now been satisfied by your assurance that there was
nothing in hand, it should presently have appeared how much I
had misliked any forcible attempts, the counsel of Christ and the
commandment of our superiors requiring the contrary, and that
in patience we should possess our souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Addressed</hi>&mdash;<q>To Sir Everard Digby, prisoner in the Tower.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Endorsed in Cecil's hand</hi>&mdash;<q>Gerard the Priest to Sir Everard
Digby.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
From Father Bartoli<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, lib. vi., cap. 6, p. 513.</note> we take a letter written from Rome,
twenty-five years after the Powder Plot, addressed by Father
Gerard to Dr. Smith, Bishop of Chalcedon, and Vicar Apostolic
of England. The translation from Bartoli's Italian version is a
very old one; the date of the letter is September 1, 1630.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>My Lord,&mdash;Not long since I received information that a
manuscript dissertation, with the title of <hi rend='italic'>Brevis Inquisitio, &amp;c.</hi>,
had been circulated in your parts; in the course of which it is
pretended that a certain person continues to glory, to the present
day, that by working under ground in the mine of Mr. Catesby
and other conspirators, by excavating and carrying out the soil
with his own hands, he has often found his shirt wet through and
dripping with sweat as copiously as if it had been dragged
through a river; and that this person is no other than myself,
according to the opinion expressed in the letter. I despised such
an idle tale as undeserving of an answer, knowing it, as most
others must know it, to be not only most false, but, moreover,
most remote, from probability. I only begged of a good Priest,
who was setting out for England, to make known to your lordship
what I had heard concerning such a deed laid to my charge, so
contrary to all truth and justice; and that I hoped you would
not give credit to it, but rather on hearing it mentioned by any
one, would show the falsehood as it is. But in the meantime,
<pb n='ccxxxix'/><anchor id='Pgccxxxix'/>
while the Priest is yet on his journey, I have learned from good
authority that the book has been printed and published, curtailed
indeed of that story, which is, however, circulated in manuscript
through the hands of many, with every circumstance and
embellishment; whence has arisen the general opinion that I
am the person there spoken of, the testimony of a Priest being
alleged, who says that he has heard me boast of it. Truly I
cannot sufficiently express my astonishment on perceiving that
there can be found a Catholic, and if a Priest so much the worse,
who has so shameless a conscience as to dare assert what he must
necessarily know to be false, and injurious to one who never did
him any harm or injury whatever. This I can affirm of myself
with respect to every Priest in England, to many of whom I
have often afforded assistance, but, to my knowledge, have never
offended one. Your lordship, moreover, must be aware how
very improbable it is that I should boast of a crime so false, so
horrible. Now, with all due reverence, I call God to witness that
I had no more knowledge of the conspiracy than a new-born
infant might have; that I never heard any one mention it; that I
had not even a suspicion of the provision of gunpowder for the
mine, excepting only when the Plot was detected, made public,
and known to every one, and when the conspirators appeared
openly in arms in the county of Warwick; then only did I hear
of it for the first time, by a message brought to the place where
I resided; and this place was so ill provided that of itself it
proved I could have no knowledge of the conspiracy, either from
the expressions of others or from my own suspicions; there being
in that place neither men nor arms sufficient to defend us from
the marauders, who on every occasion of similar commotions
issue forth and unite in bodies for plunder. Neither did this
happen for want of sufficient means to furnish and reinforce the
house with men and arms, but solely because we had no suspicion
of a commotion, much less any knowledge of a conspiracy.
Besides this, the accomplices in the Plot were subjected to the
most rigorous examination, and questioned concerning me; and
although some of them under the torture named one or others of
those who were privy to the conspiracy, nevertheless all constantly
denied it of me. Sir Everard Digby, who of all the others,
<pb n='ccxl'/><anchor id='Pgccxl'/>
for many reasons, was most suspected of having possibly revealed
the secret to me, protested in open court and declared that he
had often been instigated to say I knew something of the Plot,
but that he had always answered in the negative, alleging the
reason why he had never dared to disclose it to me, because, he
said, he feared lest I should dissuade him from it. Therefore the
greater part of the Privy Councillors considered my innocence
established, it being proved by the concurrent testimony of so
many, and by a letter in which I defended and cleared myself
from such a groundless suspicion. In that letter, besides the
reasons therein produced in proof of my innocence, I protested
before Heaven and earth that, so far from being engaged in the
conspiracy, I was as ignorant of it as man could be. Being at
that time in imminent danger of falling into the hands of the
Privy Councillors, who with the most refined diligence sent in
every direction in quest of me, I had thoughts of surrendering
myself up to every torment imaginable, and what is more to be
regarded, to the terrible and disgraceful charge of perjury, if
having me in their power they could convict me, by legal proof,
of being privy to the conspiracy. There was a time, when under
Elizabeth they held me prisoner for something more than three
years, during which period, many times and in as many ways as
they chose, did they examine me, to discover in general if I had
ever meddled in affairs of State. I challenged them to produce in
proof a single character in my hand, a single word, or anything
else sufficient to show it, and then to punish me when convicted
with the most cruel death that could be inflicted. There never
was brought forward the smallest trace or shadow of a proof.
How much more improbable is it that I should consent to a Plot
so inhuman, I who, from the natural disposition of my soul,
independently of supernatural motives, hold in abhorrence
everything that has the smallest appearance of cruelty. This
I can affirm with truth, that from the time I first embraced the
profession of life in which I am engaged, down to the present
moment, I have never, by God's mercy, desired the grievous
harm, much less the death, of any man in the world, although he
may have been my most inveterate enemy: how could I then
have had any hand or part in the sudden, unexpected, and on
<pb n='ccxli'/><anchor id='Pgccxli'/>
that account tremendous death of so many personages of such
high quality, for whom I have ever borne the greatest respect.
A person was employed to scatter copies of my forementioned
letter through various streets of London, and one in particular
was delivered to the Earl of Northampton, and by him laid before
the King, on whom my reasons so far prevailed to his satisfaction
that he would have desisted from the rigorous search
made after me, had not Cecil, for his own private ends, rendered
him more violent than ever. For being persuaded that some of
the conspirators had plotted against his life in particular, and
knowing that most of them were my friends, he hoped if he could
once lay hold of me, to find out from me how many and who
were the conspirators. For this sole reason he never rested until
he had again persuaded the King, as a thing evidently known to
him and clearly demonstrated, that I was not only an accomplice
but the ringleader in the Plot, and therefore to be the first
named in the proclamation; which was so done. Perceiving from
this that the persecution was not likely to abate, and that I might
be discovered and arrested, I took the advice to withdraw myself
for a time, and to <q>give place to wrath,</q> and, after so many years
of hard labour in England, with the Apostles <q>to come apart into
a desert place and rest a little:</q> nor was there any other principal
motive of my leaving the kingdom. In fine, this is the simple
naked truth; I was totally ignorant of the provision of gunpowder
and of the mine; I was and I am as innocent of this and of
every other conspiracy as your lordship or any other man living;
and this I affirm and swear upon my soul, without any equivocation
whatsoever; in such sort, that if the facts do not
correspond truly to the meaning of the words, or if I had any
information of the forementioned Plot before it was made public
to the whole world, as I have before said, I own myself guilty of
perjury before God and men; and as far as it is true that I had
no knowledge of it, so far and no more do I ask mercy at the
throne of God: and it is very probable that it will not be long
before I must appear at the divine tribunal, considering my age
and the present contagion in the neighbourhood; for if it should
reach us it is hardly possible I can escape, on account of the
assistance which it is my duty to render to this Community,
<pb n='ccxlii'/><anchor id='Pgccxlii'/>
whose souls are committed to my care.<note place='foot'>He was then Confessor in the English College at Rome.</note> Therefore I am induced
to hope that your lordship will not consider me so careless and
prodigal of my eternal salvation, after having spent so many
years in no other employment than that of seeking to know and
to accomplish the will of God, and of teaching the same to others,
as to be now willing to burthen my conscience and risk the
salvation of my soul by a protestation so solemn and spontaneous,
if my conscience were not pure, my cause evident, and my words
true in all sincerity. Now, as I doubt not that God, the Supreme
Judge, Who sees and knows all things, will pass sentence on my
cause according to its merits, so I hope that your lordship, now
knowing me to be innocent, will not wish me to appear guilty, by
permitting to stand against me without contradiction an accusation
so false and of such enormous infamy. Since this
accusation derives its greatest force from the authority of your
lordship, who, it is publicly said, gives credit and support to it, I
beseech you, by that love which you have for charity and justice,
to oppose the falsity of the calumny by the truth of this my
justification. With respect to the Priest, whoever he may be,
by whose false allegation your lordship appears to have been
deceived, I desire with all my heart he may meet with true
repentance before he dies, so that we may all live together and
love God in a blessed eternity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Next, we find, in Father Henry More's <hi rend='italic'>History of the English
Province S.J.</hi>,<note place='foot'>Lib. vii., n. 44, p. 339.</note> a letter from Father Thomas Fitzherbert, Rector
of the English College at Rome, of which house Father Gerard
was then Confessor. It is not necessary for us to translate it from
his Latin version, as it exists in English amongst the Stonyhurst
MSS.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. iv., n. 92.</note> It is dated some months later than the foregoing letter of
Father Gerard, and was sent by Mutius Vitelleschi, General of the
Society, to the Bishop of Chalcedon, by the hands of Fathers
Henry Floyd and Thomas Bapthorpe, who were at the same
time bearers of a second letter from Father Gerard to Bishop
Smith, extracts from which we subjoin, translated from Bartoli.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, pp. 510, 512.</note>
</p>

<pb n='ccxliii'/><anchor id='Pgccxliii'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Right Rev. and my honorable good Lord,&mdash;Having understood
that one of our Society hath been of late traduced,
<hi rend='italic'>tacito nomine</hi>, in a printed book as to have bragged that
he had sweat in working in the Powder Plot, and that your
lordship have named him, and as it seemeth, dost believe him
to be Father John Gerard, I think myself obliged to represent
to your lordship's consideration some things concerning him, and
that matter, as well in respect of the common bond of our
religion and his great merits, as also for that he is at this
present under my charge (albeit I acknowledge myself unworthy
to have such a subject), and lastly for the knowledge I have had
many years of his innocency in that point ever since that
slanderous calumny was first raised by the heretics against him,
at which time I myself and many other of his friends and
kinsmen did very diligently and curiously inform ourselves of
the truth thereof, and found that he was fully cleared of it even
by the public and solemn testimony of the delinquents themselves,
namely of Sir Everard Digby (with whom he was known
to be most familiar and confident), who publicly protested at
his arraignment that he did never acquaint him with their
design, being assured that he would not like of it, but dissuade
him from it; and of this I can show good testimony by letters
from London written hither at the same time, bearing date the
29th of January, in the year 1606. Therefore, to the end that
your lordship may the better believe it, I have thought good to
shew the same to some very credible persons, who are shortly to
depart from hence, and do mean to present themselves to your
lordship, of whom you may (if it please you) understand the
truth of it. Besides that for your better satisfaction, I have also
by our right reverend Father General's express order and commission
commanded him in their presence upon obedience
(which commandment we hold by our Rule and Institute to
bind, under pain of mortal sin) to declare the truth whether
he had any knowledge of that Powder Plot or no, and he hath
in their presence protested upon his salvation, that he had never
any knowledge of it, either by Sir Everard Digby, or any other,
until it was discovered, and that he came to know it by
common fame; besides that alleged many pregnant proofs of
<pb n='ccxliv'/><anchor id='Pgccxliv'/>
his innocency therein which I omit to write, because he himself
doth represent them to your lordship by a letter of his own; and
of this also the witnesses aforesaid may inform your lordship
if you be not otherways satisfied. In the meantime, I have
only thought it my part to give this my testimony of his solemn
protestation and oath, and withal to send to your lordship the
enclosed copies of two clauses of letters from England and
Flanders touching this matter, not doubting but that your
lordship's charity will move you to admit the same as sufficient
to clear him of that calumny, seeing there was never any proof
produced against him, nor yet any ground of that slander but
the malicious conceit and suspicion of heretics, by reason of
his acquaintance with some of the delinquents, in which case
a solemn protestation and oath, as he hath freely and voluntarily
made, may suffice both in conscience and law for a
canonical purgation to clear him from all suspicion as well of
that fact as of all collusion or double dealing in this his protestation,
especially seeing he hath always been not only <hi rend='italic'>integerrimæ
famæ</hi>, but also of singular estimation in England for his many
years' most zealous and fruitful labours there, and his constant
suffering of imprisonment and torments for the Catholic faith.
Besides that, he hath been ever since a worthily esteemed and
principal member of our Society, and given sufficient proof
of a most religious and sincere conscience, to the edification of
us all. This being considered, I cannot but hope that your
lordship will rest satisfied of his innocency in this point, and
out of your charity procure also to satisfy others who may have,
by any speech of your lordship's, conceived worse of him than
he hath deserved; for so your lordship shall provide as well for
the reparation of his fame as for the discharge of your own
conscience, being bound both by justice and charity to restitution
in this case, as I make no doubt but that your lordship would
judge if it were another man's case; yea, and exact also of
others if the like wrong had been done either to yourself, or to
any kinsman, dear friend, or subject of yours, all which he is to
me; and, therefore, I am the bolder, I will not say to expect
this at your lordship's hands (because it doth not become me),
<pb n='ccxlv'/><anchor id='Pgccxlv'/>
but humbly to crave it of you as a thing which I shall take for
a favour, no less to myself than to the Society; and so this to
no other end, I humbly take my leave, wishing to your lordship
all true felicity, this 15th of March, 1631.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Your lordship's humble servant,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas Fitzherbert.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ex literis P. Ægidii Schondonchii Seminarii Audomarensis
Rectoris 1 Martii 1606:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Dum has scribo accepi literas recentissime datas a viro
claro quibus significavit Dominum Everardum Digbæum, dum a
Judicibus pronuntiaretur in eum mortis sententia, coram eisdem
protestatum esse nullum penitus in Anglia Jesuitam hujus rei
fuisse conscium, Nam, inquit, familiaris Patri Gerardo si quis
alius, neque unquam ausus fui indicare tantillum, veritus ne
conaretur frangere nostros conatus. Itaque sancte asseruit se id
solo ex puro Catholicæ ac Romanæ Ecclesiæ zelo neque ullo
alio humano respectu suscepisse.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Out of the letter of Father Michael Walpole written to
Father Persons, the 29th of January, 1606:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Touching Gerard's letter which I have seen, I can only
say this much, that it seemeth to me to be so effectual, as
nothing can be more, so that I am fully persuaded that the
King's Majestie himself and the whole Council remain satisfied
of him [in] their own hearts, and his Majesty is reported
for certain to have declared so much in words upon the sight
of his letter.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the end, after his name, he writeth as followeth:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>This letter is confirmed since by Sir Everard Digby's speech
at his arraignment, in which he cleared all Jesuits and Priests
(to his knowledge) upon his salvation. And in particular,
that though he was particularly acquainted with Gerard, yet
he never durst mention this matter, being fully assured that
he would be wholly against it, to which my Lord of Salisbury
replied, affirming the contrary, and that he knew him to be
guilty.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='ccxlvi'/><anchor id='Pgccxlvi'/>

<p>
The first extract of the letter enclosed from Father Gerard
runs thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q>It is known to all how those of any blood have loved and
served King James. My father knew it to his cost, for he was
twice imprisoned for attempting to set free the glorious Queen
Mary, the King's mother, and to secure the succession to her
children: which intent of his own was so clear to the Ministers
of State, that besides imprisonment, to purchase his life of them
cost him some thousands of crowns, especially the first time when
there were but three accused and he one of them, and of the
other two, one lost his life. Of all which King James was
mindful when he came from Scotland to be crowned King of
England, and my brother at York offered him his service and
that of all his house. <q>I am particularly bound,</q> said he, <q>to love
your blood, on account of the persecution that you have borne
for me, and of that his love he there gave him the first pledge by
making him a Knight.</q></q><note place='foot'>Bartoli, <hi rend='italic'>Inghilterra</hi>, lib. vi., c. 6, p. 510.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The remaining extract concludes our series of exculpatory
letters:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q>I send your lordship a copy of the three letters that I wrote
to three Councillors of State, that you may see in them how I
trusted to my innocence, when I offered to put it to the proof
in the two ways which I there proposed to them. Further than
this, though the conspirators had been put to death, and I saw that
the course proposed by me to the Councillors was not accepted,
while the matter was fresh, and I yet in London, I requested of
our Fathers that I might present myself in person to the Council
of State, which I would have done had they but given me leave;
and if the Council would have proceeded against me, not on the
score of religion, but for the conspiracy only, which alone was
in question, and for which, if they had found me guilty of it,
they might have done to me their very worst. This request I
can swear that I made and renewed several times to our Fathers,
and there are some yet alive who can bear witness to it; but it
did not seem good to them to consent to it.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='ccxlvii'/><anchor id='Pgccxlvii'/>

<p>
The matter does not seem to have rested here, unless there
is some mistake in a date, for Dr. Lingard<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>History of England</hi>, ed. 1849, vol. vii., p. 549.</note> quotes from a MS.
copy, dated April 17, 1631, an affidavit made by Anthony Smith,
a Secular Priest, before the Bishop of Chalcedon, <q>that in his
hearing, Gerard had said in the Novitiate at Liége, that he
worked in the mine with the lay conspirators till his clothes were
as wet with perspiration as if they had been dipped in water;
and that the general condemnation of the Plot was chiefly owing
to its bad success, as had often happened to the attempts of
unfortunate generals in war.</q> It would seem as if this were a
repetition of the original accusation, in answer to which the
letters given above were written. Of the attack on Father
Gerard, Dr. Lingard says, <q>For my own part, upon having read
what he wrote in his own vindication, I cannot doubt his innocence,
and suspect that Smith unintentionally attributed to him
what he had heard him say of some other person.</q><note place='foot'>There is a letter extant from Father Blount, the Provincial, to the
General, dated Feb. 10, 1632, which has been understood to relate to the
accusation against Father Gerard, or to a similar accusation against some
other member of the Society. It must, however, relate to some other matter,
as it says, <q>Vivit enim adhuc author ipse criminis,</q> and that the alleged
offence took place five years before the entrance into the Society of the Father
in question.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXXIV.</head>

<p>
It remains for us only to give an account of the manuscripts that
have been used as well in the Narrative of the Powder Plot as in
the Autobiography of its author.
</p>

<p>
Father Christopher Grene, who was English Penitentiary at
St. Peter's, died in Rome in 1697.<note place='foot'>Oliver's <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea S. J.</hi></note> This Father was a most
diligent collector of all the documents that related to the history
of the persecutions of Catholics in England.<note place='foot'>Father Martin Grene wrote a letter (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>,
vol. v., n. 69) to his brother, January 1, 1665, addressed, <q>for Mr. Christopher
Grene, at Hilton</q> [Hilton, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Hill-town, meant Rome, as in the same
language <emph>customer</emph> was the Archpriest, <emph>physicians</emph> were Priests, <emph>workmen</emph>,
secular Priests, <emph>journeymen</emph>, Jesuits, &amp;c.]. His brother had asked him to give
what help he could to Father Bartoli. Speaking of the Gunpowder Plot, he
says, <q>I had once occasion to inform myself of that history, and I found none
better than the two books of Eudæmon Johannes, the one <hi rend='italic'>Ad actionem
Edouardi Coqui Apologia pro P. Hen. Garnetto</hi>, the other, <hi rend='italic'>Parallelus Torti ac
Tortoris</hi>. Though the things be there spread and scattered, yet they are (if
collected) very pertinent to clear Father Garnett and ours; for example,
among other things this is one, that the traitors had among themselves made
an oath that they would never speak of their designs to any Priests, because
they knew they would not allow of it; also, that they were specially offended
with the Jesuits for preaching patience and submission. There are divers other
circumstances which manifestly excuse ours. I had a relation made me by one
of ours who had it in Civil [Seville], which clearly shows that the whole Plot
was of Cecil's making; but it being only told by an old man, who forgot both
times and persons, I believe I shall never make use of it. Yet I have heard
strange things, which, if ever I can make out, will be very pertinent. For
certain the late Bishop of Armagh, Usher, was divers times heard to say that
if Papists knew what he knew, the blame of the Gunpowder Treason would not
lie on them. And other things I have heard, which, if I can find grounded,
I hope to make good use of. It may be if you write Civil to my brother
Frank, he will, or somebody else there, give you some light in this business.</q></note> He copied volumes
<pb n='ccxlviii'/><anchor id='Pgccxlviii'/>
of such documents, several of which are still extant. In one
which is preserved at Stonyhurst, entitled by him, <hi rend='italic'>Miscellanea de
Martyribus et Persecutione in Anglia signanda lit.</hi> M. ... <hi rend='italic'>incept.
anno 1690</hi>, he informs us that there were various books called
<hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi> in the Archives of the English College at Rome,
distinguished by the letters of the alphabet, of the contents of
which he gives us an account. At folio 51 we have: <q>Ex libro
Collectaneorum in folio signato lit<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> in Arch<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> Coll<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>i</hi> Angl. hoc
die 24 Jan. 1689. A relation of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Gunpowder Treason and of
Father Garnett's araignm<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t</hi> and martyrdome, &amp;c., written by Father
John Gerard: 'tis y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> the original written soon after y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> sayd
martyrdome. It contains 85 sheetes of paper, and is an excellent
work, and should be printed.</q> After a short analysis of the book,
the pages quoted agreeing with the Stonyhurst MS. of the Narrative,
we have, <q>A p. 176 in eod. libro Collectan. <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> una relatione
del P. Filippo Bemondo<note place='foot'>This Philip Beaumont was Father Oswald Tesimond, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Greenway,
(More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Prov.</hi>, l. vii., n. 40, p. 336).</note> della sua Missione in Inghilt<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>,</q> &amp;c.
The last page of the Stonyhurst MS., bearing the endorsement,
<q>A Relation of y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Gunpowder Treason, y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> execution, &amp;c.
Also of F. Garnett's arrayment,</q> is numbered 176. The first
page bears in Father Grene's handwriting the inscription, <q>Of
the Gunpowder Treason, written by F. John Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi>
Tomson, it is the originall.</q> We are thus enabled to recognize
our manuscript as the commencement of Father Grene's volume <hi rend='italic'>C</hi>.
<pb n='ccxlix'/><anchor id='Pgccxlix'/>
The subsequent history of the MS. is related in the two
following letters, which Dr. Oliver appended to the copy that he
made of the Narrative. It is only necessary to add that the Rev.
Marmaduke Stone, to whom the second letter is addressed,
transferred the Academy of Liége (as it was called after the
suppression of the Society), of which he was made President in
1790, to Stonyhurst, in 1794. In 1803 he was appointed
Provincial in England by the General of the Society in Russia.
In all probability, therefore, the MS. was given by Father Thorpe
to Father Stone, at Liége, and by him was brought to Stonyhurst,
where it now is.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The following extract is taken from a letter addressed by the
Rev. John Thorpe from Rome, August 12, 1789, to Henry, eighth
Lord Arundell.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>The collection of ancient papers at the English College here
consisted of two sorts. The first belonged to the Stuart family,
and was deposited there only after the old Chevalier retired into
Italy. Neither Rector nor any other person in the College knew
anything of the contents, which were locked up in a strong
chamber, of which the keys were kept in the Palace of SS.
Apostoli, and everything was carefully removed to that palace
several months before the oppression of the Society. The other
collection related to ecclesiastical matters, from the time of
Henry VIII. to the beginning of the present century; it had been
a repository of all papers and letters of many indefatigable men
in preserving a faithful remembrance of whatever was interesting
to religion during that period. But different removals of these
papers, which were very many, had thrown them into disorder.
Father Booth can tell in what state he left them. I have before
mentioned to your lordship a MS. relating to our British saints,
written in the manner of a calendar, in which many curious
passages of history frequently occurred. I do not think it had
been seen either by Father Alford (who wrote the annals of our
British Church up to the year 1180) or by Mr. Wilson, who
digested the English Martyrology that was daily read at St. Omer.
Other MSS. of this kind were also in the same place, while I lived
in the College. Afterwards, when the storm began to blacken over
<pb n='ccl'/><anchor id='Pgccl'/>
us, divers attempts were made to put these papers into a place of
security; but every means miscarried. They never belonged to
the College, and among what are the College archives many
very interesting papers remain belonging to the Jesuits. The
papers above mentioned were finally destroyed by one accident
or another, to prevent further fears of molestation in those days
of arbitrary persecution. If anciently there had been any
valuable MSS. in the old hospital, they were supposed to have
been removed when it was converted to the purpose of a College,
because scarce anything more than accounts of pilgrims, house
expenses, and like articles, remained under that date, and even
these in no regular order. Thus I apprehend that no material
intelligence of remote historical facts can be gathered from hence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will now venture to tell your lordship of a curious
MS. that a very unforeseen accident brought into my hands,
at a considerable distance of time from the oppression of
the Society, and from the total removal of the Jesuits from
the College. It is a long account of the Gunpowder Plot,
from beginning to the end in the original handwriting of
Father John Gerard. It is a folio volume of about 300 pages,
composed with an extensive knowledge of the persons concerned,
and of whom several curious anecdotes are recounted. Father
John Gerard suffered much on occasion of that Plot, wherein the
prosecutors tried every means to involve him in one manner or
another. During the plundering and ransacking of the Houses at
the oppression, such an account was reported to have been found
in the Novitiate by the notorious Alfani, and it immediately was
sought for by our countrymen, and instructions were said to have
come from our Court at London for obtaining it at any price.
But on further examination that account contained no more than
relations of the religious lives and edifying death of those Jesuits
who suffered on that occasion. I have never heard what became
of those papers, but suppose them to have been destroyed, with
very many others of no less edification. I must find some good
place wherein to deposit the relation above mentioned; it is
very curious, though it contains no new intelligence of the fact
described in it. It is written with a singular candour that distinguishes
the good religious man, and with a politeness that marks
<pb n='ccli'/><anchor id='Pgccli'/>
the gentleman. Your lordship may signify all this with my best
respects to Mr. More</q> [the last English Provincial before the
suppression], <q>desiring his counsel on the manner of disposing
of this valuable MS., every line of which may be
esteemed a relic for the eminent sanctity of the writer.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Lastly, we have an extract from a letter written from Rome,
March 26, 1791, by the Rev. John Thorpe to the Rev. Marmaduke
Stone, President of the English Academy at Liége.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q>Among other things with me is one very singular piece, which
I look upon as a kind of property of your House, at least in the
light wherein it stood twenty years ago. It is an original folio MS.
all in the handwriting of venerable Father John Gerard, wherein
he gives an ample relation of the Gunpowder Plot; and it is, I
believe, the only relation extant that was written by a person
accused of being in any manner acquainted of it. This article
demands your secrecy, and it is earnestly recommended to it; but
your counsel is also asked, where and how this rare <foreign rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>
should be placed. Religion has nothing to fear from it. A
summary of its contents was sent some time ago to England, and
was in the hands of Lord Arundell. At the time of the Society's
suppression here, a commission came hither from England
(supposed to be given by the Court) for purchasing at any rate, if
any such relation should be found among the Jesuits' archives. A
long Latin account of Father Garnett's sufferings was triumphantly
seized among the papers of the Novitiate, and occasioned
the vulgar mistake of what was sought being really found; but the
contents, when understood, notoriously demonstrated the contrary.
This is written in English, in that easy devout style for which
everything of the writer is remarkable. It is a valuable relic.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Though we cannot exactly determine the date of the MS.,
we can approximate to it pretty nearly. First of all, it is clear
from the mention of Sir Thomas Gerard's knighthood at p. 27,
that the book was written before the creation of baronets in 1611.
At page 282, Father Southwell's martyrdom is said to have
happened eleven years before. As he died in 1595, and Father
Gerard escaped from England in May, 1606, the Narrative would
seem to have been written in the latter part of that year. We
<pb n='cclii'/><anchor id='Pgcclii'/>
have, besides, Father Grene's statement that it was <q>written
soon after the martyrdom</q> of Father Garnett, and Father Gerard's
own assertion in his Autobiography: <q>I myself, when I came
from England to Rome, was ordered to put in writing an account
of the whole affair, and did so as well as I could.</q>
</p>

<p>
The original MS. of the Autobiography no longer exists.
Father Grene had seen it; for an analysis of it, <hi rend='italic'>transcript. ex
autographo ipsius</hi>, in his hand is in the second volume of the
MSS. kept at Stonyhurst under the name of <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>, which
we have quoted under the letter <hi rend='italic'>P</hi>. The MS. we have used,<note place='foot'>For our translation we are indebted to the pen of Father Kingdon.
Portions of it have appeared in the <hi rend='italic'>Month</hi>, and, rendered into French by
Father Forbes, in the <hi rend='italic'>Etudes Théologiques</hi> at Paris.</note>
which belongs to Stonyhurst, bears the title, <q>Narratio Patris
Joannis Gerardi de rebus a se in Anglia gestis.</q> It purports
to be a copy from an original at the Novitiate of St. Andrew,
in the hands of Father Francis Sacchini, the historian. We
have no means of knowing whether it is the same copy as
that which existed, according to Father Grene,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Collectanea M</hi>, f. 52 h.</note> in the
volume of the <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi> called <hi rend='italic'>D</hi>, in the English College at
Rome. He mentions it under the title of <q>Narratio P. Joannis
Gerardi de tota vita sua. Copia.</q> The Autobiography was
composed in 1609, as is plain from the mention of Robert
Drury's martyrdom, which our author says happened two years
before the time when he was writing. This good Priest suffered
at Tyburn, Feb. 26, 1607.
</p>

<p>
We now leave Father John Gerard in the hands of the reader,
parting from him with sincere respect, and sharing good old
Father Grene's affection for him, who in some notes, written in
preparation, apparently, for an English Menology, has set down as
applicable to Father Gerard the phrases, <q>Non ipse martyrio, sed
ipsi martyrium defuit,</q> and, again, the Church's antiphon for
St. Martin, <q>O beatum virum, qui totis visceribus diligebat
Christum! O sanctissima anima, quam etsi gladius persecutoris
non abstulit, palmam tamen martyrii non amisit.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ccliii'/><anchor id='Pgccliii'/>

<div>
<head>Additional Notes.</head>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>. and p. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.&mdash;Elizabeth, the mother of John Gerard, was the eldest of
the three daughters and co-heiresses of Sir John Port, and at her father's
death, June 6, 1557, Etwall became the property of Sir Thomas Gerard.
This is the <q>dwelling-house within two miles of</q> Tutbury <q>Castle where</q>
Mary Queen of Scots <q>was kept,</q> where Father Gerard lived when a
child for three years. Sir John's second daughter, Dorothy, took Dale Abbey
in Derbyshire to her husband, George Hastings fourth Earl of Huntingdon;
and Margaret, the third daughter, by her marriage conveyed Cubley in the
same county to Sir Thomas Stanhope, grandfather of the first Earl of
Chesterfield.
</p>

<p>
Father Gerard had three sisters, Mary, wife of John Jenison; Dorothy,
wife of Edmund Peckham; and Martha, wife of Michael Jenison. In the
British Museum (Harl. MSS. 6998, f. 197) there is a report, dated June 16,
1595, from Edward Cokayne, evidently a Derbyshire magistrate, of assistance
given by him to William Newall, <q>one of the messengers of Her Majesty's
Chamber,</q> in searches in that county. The following paragraph relates to
one of Father Gerard's sisters: <q>The first house that we searched according to
his direction was the house of one Mr. Jenison, that married one of my Lady
Gerard's daughters, she being a great recusant, and not her husband: howsoever,
it is reported that there is great resort of strangers, but what they be, we
cannot learn, neither at this time did we find any there, but pictures in the
chambers according to their profession. Only one West that was a messenger
between the seminaries was fled six weeks before we came, and whither he
is gone, as yet we cannot learn.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>.&mdash;It is not easy to reconcile the dates at this period of Father
Gerard's life. He could not have been nineteen when he went to France, for
he lived at Rhemes three years, one at Clermont, and about a year in England
before he was committed to the Marshalsea; he was a full year in that prison,
and after his discharge his recognizances were renewed for perhaps another
year before leaving England for Rome, and he was in the College about
seventeen months before he was ordained Priest towards the close of 1587,
when he yet wanted several months of the canonical age for the Priesthood,
that is, twenty-five. From this we should gather that when he first went to
Rhemes he was under seventeen, which would have been in 1580.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it is equally difficult to understand the date given in the
Douay Diary, August or September, 1577, which would make him fourteen.
Perhaps this was a visit to the continent before going to Oxford, which he says
was when he was fifteen, spending a year there and two years afterwards
with Mr. Leutner as a tutor. The Douay Diary has the following entry.
<pb n='ccliv'/><anchor id='Pgccliv'/>
<q>1577. Aug. 29 die, advenerunt ex Anglia Mr. Paschallus vir nobilis, et
quidam Aldrigius mercator: eodem etiam tempore adventavit Mr. Gerrardus
D. Tho. Gerrardi Equitis Aurati filius.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>.&mdash;The following is the entry respecting Father John Gerard in the
<hi rend='italic'>Liber Annalium</hi> of the English College at Rome: <q rend='pre'>Joannes Gerardus Anglus
dioecesis Lichfeldiensis annum agens 23<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>m</hi>, aptus ad theologiam positivam,
receptus fuit in hoc Anglorum Collegium inter alumnos SSmi. D. N. Sixti V.
a P. Gulielmo Holto hujus Collegii Rectore de mandato Illmi. Hippoliti
Cardis. Aldobrandini Viceprotectoris sub die 5<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> Aprilis Anno Dni. 1587, cum
fuisset antea Convictor per septem menses.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Anno Dni. 1587 mense ... accepit ordines minores, et mense Augusto
Subdiaconatum, et Diaconatum 9<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> mense die 16.</q>
</p>

<p>
His name appears in the Pilgrims' Register of the English College, as
having been there received Aug. 5, 1586 (Stonyhurst MSS., Father Grene's
<hi rend='italic'>Miscell. de Coll. Angl.</hi>, p. 19).
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>.&mdash;The Douay Diary gives us the dates of Father Gerard's arrival at
Rhemes and his departure thence, together with the names of his fellow-travellers.
It is clear that if they left Rhemes on the 26th of September, and
remained at Eu until they could receive an answer from Rome, they could not
possibly have landed in England so soon as the end of October. <q>1588.
Sept. 21 die, Roma ad nos venerunt D. Rodolphus Buckland, D. Joannes
Gerard filius D. Thomæ Gerard Equitis Aurati, D. Arthurus Stratford</q>
[whom Gifford, the spy, called Shefford], <q>D. Edouardus Oldcorn presbyteri.
Die 26 Angliam ituri discesserunt D. Jo. Gerard, D. Rodolphus Buckland,
D. Arthurus Stratford et D. Edouardus Oldcorn.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.&mdash;In the Public Record Office (<hi rend='italic'>Domestic, Eliz.</hi>, vol. 244, n. 7) are
two forms of indictment of Richard Jackson, Priest, for saying Mass, and of
various members of the Wiseman family for being present at Mass, on the 25th
August and the 8th September, 34 Eliz., 1592. The endorsement is <q>Masse-mongers.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>.&mdash;Line 22, for <q>Worcestershire</q> read <q>Warwickshire.</q> See
p. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.
</p>

<p>
Pp. <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>., <ref target='Pglxx'>lxx</ref>.&mdash;In his examination Brother Emerson frankly acknowledged
himself to be a Jesuit Lay-brother, and <q>sometime Campion's boy.</q> A copy
of his examination is in the British Museum (Harleian MSS., 6998, f. 65). It
is dated April 17, 1593, and bears the marginal note <q>Ley Jesuite.</q> <q rend='pre'>Ralph
Emerson of the bishopric of Durham, scholar, of the age of forty-two years
or thereabouts, examined before Sir Owen Hopton, Knight, Mr. Doctor
Goodman, Dean of Westminster, Mr. Dale, Mr. Fuller, and Mr. Young, who
refuseth to be sworn, but saith first that he hath [been] in prison these nine
years&mdash;namely, three years and a quarter in the Counter in the Poultry, and
the rest of that time hath been in the Clink&mdash;committed by Mr. Young for
bringing over of books, called my Lord of Leicester's books as he saith, and
hath been examined before Sir Francis Walsingham, and before Mr. Young,
and before others divers times, and was never indicted to his knowledge.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Item, he confesseth that he is a Lay Jesuit, and took that degree at
Rome fourteen years since, and was sometime Campion's boy, and sayeth
when he took that Order he did vow chastity, poverty, and obedience to the
Superior of their House, and if he sent him to the Turk he must go.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Item, being urged to take the oath of allegiance to Her Majesty,
refuseth the same, and saith he may not take any oath.</q>
</p>

<pb n='cclv'/><anchor id='Pgcclv'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Item, he saith he hath neither lands, goods, nor other living, but will
not set down by whom he is maintained and now relieved.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Item, he refuseth to be reformed, and to come to Church, affirming that
he will live and die in his faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Item, being demanded whether if the Pope should send an army into this
realm, to establish that which he calleth the Catholic Romish religion, he
would in the like case fight for the Queen's Majesty on her side against the
said army, or on the army's side, saith that he will never fight against Her
Majesty, nor against the religion which he professeth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Concordat cum originali.&mdash;H. Fermor.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgxlvi'>xlvi</ref>.&mdash;Father Tesimond, in the Italian narrative already mentioned
(p. <ref target='Pgccxlviii'>ccxlviii</ref>) as forming part of Father Grene's volume <hi rend='italic'>C</hi> (fol. 185), says that,
when he came to England in 1597, Father Garnett was living in a house called
Morecroftes, at Uxbridge, twelve or thirteen miles from London. There may
have been a friendly house at Brentford, for this was their place of meeting on
one occasion when they had suddenly to leave Uxbridge on account of a
search.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgliii'>liii</ref>.&mdash;Dominam ipsam domus in suo cubiculo cum puellis suis clauserunt
(MS.) More probably <q>with her daughters</q> than <q>with her maids.</q> William
and Jane Wiseman had three children, Jane, Dorothea, and Winifred. John
who married Mary, daughter of Sir Rowland Rydgeley, had two daughters,
Lucy and Elizabeth, and an only son, Aurelius Piercy Wiseman, who was
killed in a duel in London in 1680. The following inscription on his grave, in
Wimbish Church, is given by Wright (<hi rend='italic'>History of Essex</hi>, vol. ii., p. 134):
<q>Here rest the sad remains of Aurelius Piercy Wiseman, of Broad Oak, in
this parish, Esq., the last of the name of that place, and head and chief of that
right worshipful and ancient family, who was unfortunately killed in the flower
of his age, December 11, 1680.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pglvii'>lvii</ref>.&mdash;From the <hi rend='italic'>Life of Anne Countess of Arundel</hi>, published in 1857 by
the Duke of Norfolk (p. 308), we learn that, during the Earl's imprisonment,
<q>she hired a little house at Acton, Middlesex, six miles distant from London.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgcxl'>cxl</ref>.&mdash;Father Tesimond relates a search some two years earlier than this,
in which Father Joseph Pollen escaped capture (Stonyhurst MSS., C, fol. 184).
</p>

<p>
Pp. <ref target='Pgclxvi'>clxvi.</ref> and <ref target='Pgcciii'>cciii.</ref>&mdash;Sir Oliver Manners wrote the following letter in
Italian to Father Aquaviva, General of the Society, from Turin, April 17,
1612, shortly before his eldest brother's death (Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>,
vol. vi.). <q>I cannot tell you what comfort I received from the letters of your
Paternity. The troubles I then had will tell it better than I can, for, when I
was seriously ill, my brother the Earl sent to say that I was to expect no more
help from England, as the King has entrusted my houses and estates to him,
and would not permit him to send me a penny. Precisely at that moment the
letters of your Paternity reached me, and seemed to me sent by the Lord to
make me touch with my hand how His Divine Majesty never abandons those
who hope in Him and suffer for His love; and as at that time I had a great
desire of suffering more and more, if so it should please our Lord, so my
strength returned to me far more rapidly than I could have expected, and thus
I assured myself that it was the Divine will that I should reach my intended
goal, there to do something for His service, <hi rend='italic'>sive per vitam sive per mortem</hi>.
And so I undertook my journey, and have already reached Turin. To-morrow
I start for Lyons. In England I cannot expect anything better than that which
has befallen the Baron</q> [Vaux], <q>my companion, who is in prison by the
<pb n='cclvi'/><anchor id='Pgcclvi'/>
King's express orders, and expects to lose all he has; for his mother is already
condemned to the punishment called <foreign rend='italic'>præmunire</foreign>, that is, the loss of all temporalities
and perpetual imprisonment, for refusing the oath of allegiance, as they
call it. The grace I ask from God is so to bear myself that I may always show
myself grateful for the many favours of your Paternity, as becomes a disciple of
the Society, and for this intention with all humility I asked to be armed with
your blessing, and I beg to be partaker of the Holy Sacrifices and prayers of
your Paternity and of all the Society. In conclusion with all reverence I kiss
your hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgclxxxiv'>clxxxiv.</ref>&mdash;The following is the confidential report made to the General
respecting Father Gerard, previous to his profession. By a singular chance the
paper in which it is contained is the only one of similar reports that has come
to our hands. It is amongst the Stonyhurst MSS. (<hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. vi.). Father
Gerard's name is the ninth on the paper. We translate from the Latin:
<q>Father John Gerard, English, forty-five years old, nineteen in the Society,
twenty-one on the English mission.</q> [The writer was not aware of the true
date of his admission into the Society.] <q>He studied at Rome in the English
College controversy and cases of conscience for four years.</q> [These four years
must include his three years residence at Rhemes.] <q>He was admitted in
England, where he made his noviceship. He is a very spiritual man; he is
endowed with an admirable power of gaining souls; he has also more than
middling talent for preaching; and he is held to be not unfit for government.
If these talents can supply the defect of learning, taking also into account all
that he has suffered for the Catholic faith, then he is proposed for the four vows.
It would be a consolation both to himself and to the many Catholics of note, by
whom he is held in high esteem. But if not, then he is proposed for profession
of the three vows.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgcxc'>cxc.</ref>&mdash;Among the papers of Sir Edward Phelips, preserved at Montacute
House, Somersetshire, of which a copy has been deposited in the Public Record
Office by the Historical MSS. Commission, we have the examinations of two
of Mrs. Vaux' servants, one of whom is the <q>Ric. the butler</q> of whom Lady
Markham speaks.
</p>

<p>
<q>The examination of Francis Swetnam, servant to Mrs. Elizabeth Vaux,
and served her in the bakehouse, taken the third of December, 1605.
Saith that he hath been a recusant these two years, but will now come to the
Church, for that he had rather adventure his own soul than loosen his five
children, but cannot give any reason why he should adventure his soul by
coming to Church. Saith that he was taken in his mistress' house and brought
up with her to London, but denieth that he was ever at any Mass, or that he
knoweth any Priest, and cannot deliver any other material thing to be set down.
The mark of Francis Swetnam, Jul. Cæsar, Rog.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> Wilbraham, E. Phelipps,
Jo. Croke, George More, Walter Cope, Fr. Bacon, John Doddridge</q> (f. 25).
</p>

<p>
<q>The examination of Richard Richardson, butler to Mrs. Vaux. He saith
he hath served his mistress about six years, and hath not come to Church
since he was eleven year old. Saith that since Midsummer last Catesby
was at Harwardds [Harrowden] only one time, which was about St. Luke's
Day; and Sir Everard Digby was there only twice, the former time about the
6th of August and the later time about St. Luke's Day; and that Francis
Tresham was not there this twelvemonth; Mr. Rookwood these three years;
and that Winter, Grant, Percy, Morgan, were never there during his service.
And for matter of faith or revealing of Priests or Masses, he desireth to be
<pb n='cclvii'/><anchor id='Pgcclvii'/>
spared, because it concerneth his soul. Richard Richardson, Jul. Cæsar,
Rog.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi> Wilbraham, Jo. Croke, John Doddridge, Walter Cope, George More,
Fr. Bacon.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Endorsed</hi>&mdash;<q>6° December, 1605</q> (f. 32).
</p>

<p>
These papers (f. 58 et seq.) likewise contain Serjeant Phelips' Brief for the
prosecution of Sir John Yorke for complicity with the Powder Plot, about
1612. The first three of <q>five general heads</q> of accusation are: <q>1. That
Gerard was received by Sir John Yorke both before and after the Powder
Treason. 2. That secret passages and places were made for Gerard at
Golthwaite. 3. That a private diet was provided for him.</q> A few specimens
of the evidence will show that, whoever it was who frequented Sir John Yorke's
house, at all events it was not Father Gerard, who never set foot in England
after May, 1606. Francis Brown: <q>He hath seen Gerard the Jesuit at Sir
John Yorke's house called Golthwaite both before and after the Powder
Treason. He hath seen Gerard the Jesuit within this seven years at least
twenty times. The last time was at Audebroughe in Christmas last [1610],
when Gerard lay secret in the house all the Christmas. And once he went up
into the chamber where Gerard was sitting by the fire. And resteth assured
that Sir John Yorke knows where Gerard is. That there was no half year
passed since the Powder Treason but he saw him at one of Sir John Yorke's
houses, and mentioneth four particular times.</q> The marginal note is, <q>The
servants to Sir John Yorke all deny the conveying of Gerard or the knowledge
of him, whereof Johnson was put to torture and denied it.</q> William Browne
the elder <q>names the place where he met him in North Wales, soon after the
Powder Treason and before the Proclamation.</q> William Browne the younger:
<q>On Martinmas Day was two years, in a Close called Burnings, near Sir John
Yorke's house, near a ford, he met Johnson on foot, and a man like to the
person described by the Proclamation to be Gerard on a mare of Sir John
Yorke's called White Friar.</q> Robert Joye: <q>As he was working in the hall
at Golthwaite in the summer before the Powder Treason, about the later Lady
Day in harvest, Marmaduke Lupton, the steward to Sir John Yorke, came to
him and told him it was my lady's pleasure he should remove out of the hall
and work in the buttery. Whereupon he removed into the buttery, and
Lupton put the door to. Whereat he marvelling pulled open the door a little,
and saw Lupton bring in a reasonable broad man. And the Lady Yorke
came out of the parlour and met him in the entry that goeth to the kitchen,
and up the stairs to the garret she said, 'Welcome, Mr. Gerard,' which this
examinate perfectly heard, for there was but an inch board between. Mr.
Gerard was carried up to the garret chamber, and remained there a month, not
coming openly down. Heard Lupton, Grange, and Almond many times
severally ask the cook secretly whether Mr. Gerard's meat were ready.</q>
Sampson Baines: <q>The Lady Yorke did use to appoint what meat he should
dress for dinner, and what for the chamber, which was commonly two dishes
and no more.</q> The margin here has, Margaret Almond: <q>She carried no
meat at any time to any strangers, saving such as were her master's and lady's
friends. She made shift to carry up meat, though she go with a crutch and
have but one leg.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii.</ref>&mdash;From the following letter it appears plain that the names of the
Ambassadors are wrongly given. And a witness named Parsons, examined
Dec. 12, 1605, says that a <q>Priest named Tempest went over with the Spanish
Ambassador about Bartholomew-tide last</q> (Montacute Papers, f. 46). So the
Conde de Villa Mediana left England in the latter part of August, 1605.
</p>

<pb n='cclviii'/><anchor id='Pgcclviii'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Father Baldwin from Brussels to Father Persons at Rome, May 20,
1606. <q>Since my last, five days ago, arrived at &mdash;5 (St. Omers), 469
(Father Gerard), where also is one</q> [Richard Fulwood] <q>whom 456 (H.
Garnett) was wont to use in all his chief business of passage, receiving
and retaining of all things. I take it he be 229 (Jesuit) also. They are yet
627 (secret), and so it is requisite for a time, especially in that the 194 225
(Marquis Ambassador) brought them, and by his dexterous and courteous
manner had great care of them. The Marquis of St. Germain came hither two
days ago, and both he and D. Blasco de Arragon came as well informed of our
English matters as I could wish. They have made relation accordingly to the
Nuncio, and this morning to me, who have been with them a long while.
They praise the courage and constancy of Catholics marvellously, and have an
apprehension of the daily increase of them, as also that the better sort in
England are inclined Catholicly and such in profession. They speak much of
the zeal of the Lady of Shrewsbury and of the indignation of the King, who,
hearing of the manner of Father Ouldcorne's death and requesting all Catholics
to pray for him and say <hi rend='italic'>De profundis</hi>, there were found so many to say that
aloud, as they were esteemed a great part of the number, and so many by
signs and voices to have given show of Catholic profession, as all were amazed.
Thus they report; and also that Father Garnett was to be executed the day
which they came away, in Paul's Churchyard, although another writing from
St. Omers says that it was deferred the day following, for that the day first
appointed was May Day, and Father Garnett, being advertised of his death,
should answer, <q>What then, will you make a May-game of me?</q> Howsoever,
it is held for certain that he is dead, and that Marquis told the Nuncio
that therefore he departed the sooner, as unwilling to be present at such a
tragedy.... I think Father Gerard may live in these countries after that
Mr. Owen is delivered (of whom the Archduke mindeth to have great care),
yet he who is said to have had correspondence with him, one Philips the
decipherer, is now committed to the Tower. And it were very necessary one
of ours remain in Paris, for which place Father Keynes might serve for a time,
at least in that he is not a man noted, and hath the French tongue, as having
lived there. Father Schondonch is of my opinion, and Father Gerard will do
well in his place after some month or two, if things alter not much, for he can
hardly be in any other place in regard of his indisposition, if it be as I have
heard. I shall soon know more thereof. Father Lee were good in England
in my opinion, for the consolation of many of ours, and Father Gerard's friends,
all which I remit to your consideration.</q>
</p>

<p>
The same to the same, July 3, 1606. <q>I have not as yet received from
England from any of our Fathers; only John Powell, the interpreter of the
Spanish Ambassador, relateth what passed at the execution of Father Garnett,
upon the 13th May Stylo Novo and the 3rd Stylo Vetere. He hath given
exceeding satisfaction to all sorts, and much confounded our enemies of the
one sort and other. He was drawn according to the usual manner to
Paul's Churchyard upon a hurdle and straw; his arms were not bound neither
when he was executed. Such concourse of people as hath not been seen....
The Spanish Ambassador would not remain in London that day; he hath got
his shirt, and some of his blood is sent to Spain, which I have seen here, also
his apparel is gotten, as I hear. Here now is Richard Fulwood, who telleth
me that Father Gerard is very sick at St. Omers; that said you would have
him come to Rome. I fear me that journey will kill him.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='cclix'/><anchor id='Pgcclix'/>

<p>
Father Gerard quickly rallied from his sickness, for in less than a fortnight
after this he wrote from Brussels to Father Persons, under the pseudonym of Fr.
Harrison. The letter is so characteristic of the man that, though long, we give it
in full, from the original at Stonyhurst (<hi rend='italic'>Angl. A.</hi>, vol. vi).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>July 15, 1606.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Jesus. Maria.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Pax C.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ti</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Most dear and respected Father,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have received your letters of the &mdash;&mdash; last, wherein
you show your fatherly care and undeserved love unto me, as were
sufficient to bind unto you any grateful heart, although he were not tied with
former obligations. But I am so much and so many ways bound unto you
before by favours of the highest kind, that these do only tie me unto you with
new knots, though I was before so wholly yours and so firmly tied that sincerely
I had rather not to be than be untied. I beseech you, sir, that you will be
pleased to present my humble duty unto Father General, in whose favour
though your good word do procure me that place which I can no ways deserve,
yet this I hope you may promise for me, that I will now begin to do my best
endeavours, that I may be framed in all things as is fit for a child of that most
holy family whereof he hath the care, that both by my voice and hands he may
acknowledge me for his child, the better to deserve the blessing of so great and
good a father. I would now acknowledge my duty by letters, but that I am
ashamed of my Latin, and loath to trouble with so rude lines, unless there were
further occasion or that you thought it needful. But I hope to come and do
my duty in person so soon that it will not be necessary to signify it by letters.
I will stay as you appoint until I have your letters for my coming forward, and
in the meantime will not be solicitous one whit, having no desire in the world
whereof I would not most willingly leave the whole care unto you, and indeed
desiring to have no other desires but yours so far as I may be able to discern
them, after that I have expressed my reasons as I know you would have me to
do, and after that you know me better and my many great wants, which, that
they may be more exactly known unto you, makes me so desirous to be with
you for some time, howsoever it may please you to dispose of me afterwards.
And if the chief cause why you think it best for me to stay awhile in these
parts be for that you would have me secret as yet, and especially not to be
seen with you there whilst the appellants are negotiating their uncharitable
accusations of their brethren, then I suppose you will think I may be fully as
secret there as here, if I be first wary in my coming into the town and then be
your prisoner for some time (which I most desire), and then go to St. Andrew's,
without visiting any holy places and being seen in the town until you think it
convenient. And because, in my second and third letters, I expressed my
earnest desire of this private course at my first coming, I suppose I shall hear
from you in your next letter or the next but one, that you think best I come
forward, unless you wish my stay for some other reasons than the desire of my
being secret. I grant I might perform my desire of some time of recollection
either in Louvain or in the new House if it go forwards, under Father Talbot;
but I have many reasons why I desire first to be with you for some time,
which I think you would allow of if you knew them. And I would be glad
also if it might be to begin in St. Andrew's, to draw there some lively water
out of the chiefest fountain, and this rather in the winter than to come the
next spring, because I much fear my health if I be there in the heats. But
<pb n='cclx'/><anchor id='Pgcclx'/>
after I have been there for some time, for so long time as you shall think it
convenient that I stay in that school, I shall be glad to be Father Talbot's
Minister here, or to have some office of action under him, if my health do
require any exercise of body. I hear there is one prepared for Minister that is
very fit, but I could have care of the Church, and then perhaps should
get some stuff to furnish it from some friends of mine in England; or I could
have care of the garden, for I am excellent at that (if you will permit me to
praise myself), for that was much of my recreation in England, and I hope
my brother will witness with me that he hath seen a good many plants of my
setting and tasted the fruit of some of them. But indeed, dear Father, if it
may stand with your liking, I would be very glad to see you and be with you
for some days before I settle anywhere, how private soever my abode there be,
either at the first or for the whole time of my stay, as yourself shall see it best.
As for the settling of any with my friends, I have done it before my departure,
leaving my old companion and dear friend, Father Percy, in the place where I
was, who is so much esteemed and desired by them as none can be likely to
be more profitable. Most of my other special friends I commended partly
to Father Antony [Hoskins], and partly to him, both which are most
grateful to all my friends and acquaintance, and indeed I know not any two
there that, in my simple opinion, better deserve it. As concerning Father
Roger Lee's going into England, if you please that I write justly that I think,
there be divers reasons for which I think it, at this time, very inconvenient.
First, in that he is so profitable where he is, that it will not be easy to find
another will do so much good in that place; and, in one word to express my
opinion, for ought I see, the most good of the House, both for external discipline
and for progress in spirit, dependeth upon his care and effectual industry,
wherein I should think it more needful to provide him more helpers of like
desires and practical endeavours (who would conspire with him and have
talents to effect both with the good Rector and with the scholars, that which
they should together find to be most expedient). The Fathers which be there
do very well, but all are not of like apprehensions and proceedings, and I
suppose if yourself did see all particulars, you would think Father Roger to be
a strong helper to the good of that House, and that it would nourish much if
it had some others of his like. I know not where to name one upon the
sudden, unless it be Father Henry Flud [Floyd], whose zeal and practical proceedings
I think would be very profitable for that House, if he may be spared,
and truly in my opinion upon the good of that House dependeth much the
good and quiet of the other Colleges, besides much edification to many, both
friends and enemies, unto whom this is a continual spectacle.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But besides this reason (which alone I take to be sufficient) I wish Father
Roger's stay for the good he may hereafter do in England, which I do hope
will be great, and therefore great pity it should now be lost before the fruit of
so likely a tree can come to ripeness. For, sir, yourself can better judge that
none can be much profitable in England until he have gotten acquaintance there,
and until his acquaintance by their trial of him have gotten a great opinion
and estimation of him, which then they will spread from one to another, and
every one will bring his friend, who upon hearing will be desirous to try, but
after trial will say unto the friend that brought him, <q><hi rend='italic'>Jam non propter
sermonem tuum credimus sed ipsi</hi>,</q> &amp;c. By this means one shall have, after
some continuance, more acquaintances and devoted friends than he can satisfy,
and more business in that kind than he can turn his hands unto; but this is
<pb n='cclxi'/><anchor id='Pgcclxi'/>
supposing he may at the first go up and down to get this acquaintance, and to
be so known unto many; and until he have means so to do, if he have never
so good talents, yet he shall not do so much good as a meaner person that is
better acquainted. Now in this time I do verily think, if the laws be put in
execution, there will be no means at all to get acquaintance, but the best
acquainted shall have difficulty to help his known friends, and to be helped by
them with safe places of abode as [I have declared at] large in my last letters,
and they must lie much still and private and do [good part of] their [work by
means of le]tters. Therefore, although I know Father Roger would be as
much esteemed of my special friends as any that could be sent (unless my
brother</q> [probably Sir Oliver Manners] <q>had served his apprenticeship
and were made a journeyman, for of his skill and workmanship in
framing the best wedding garment there is great and general hope conceived)
yet, things staying as they do in England, and Father Roger so
well acquainted now with the place where he is, and thereby also more
profitable there than a stranger could be, although as fit for the place as
himself (which truly I think will be hard to find) my friends also being already
furnished in England: these reasons move me to think it neither needful nor
best that Father Roger go thither as yet: which yet in a more quiet time I
shall be bold to beg for, if I see the College where he is so furnished that
without great loss it might want him. I find Father Roger desirous of England
if it were thought best, but wholly desirous to do that which yourself do think
most convenient, but when I urge him to speak his very thoughts whether he
do not think the College would be at want, he cannot deny but that the College
hath need rather of more than less help, and surely I think if it were another's
case of whom he might with humility acknowledge how profitable he is, I do
think he would absolutely do his best to hinder it as I do.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For the answer to your questions, though in my last long letters I did in
part answer to most of them before I received yours, yet now I will briefly
again set down my opinion to the several points, Father Baldwin having
written of them in his last, I being at St. Omers; but now I am come to him,
being advised by the physician there to go to the Spa for the drying up of my
rheum, which here I shall take further counsel of, how far it is needful, and
whether the great rains have not made the waters of less force. I am here
private, and more private than I could be at St. Omers whilst the banished
Priests are passing by. I think I shall hear within two or three posts your
further pleasure; if not, I will return and then begin to talk with the youths
there, or do any service I can as you appointed in your last. In the meantime,
with many humble thanks for your many undeserved favours, I rest this 15th
of July.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Your Rev. son and servant wholly to command,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Fr. Harrison.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Address&mdash;<q>Al molto Rev. in Christo Padre, il Padre Roberto Parsonio,
Rettore del Collegio delli Inglesi, Roma.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
To these we must add an extract from a letter of Father Persons dated
December 29, 1606, and evidently written while Father Gerard was at Tivoli
(Stonyhurst MSS., <hi rend='italic'>P.</hi>, vol. ii., f. 447). <q>The man you name, to wit, Ger[ard]
passed this way some months gone, but made little or no abode, lest offence
might be taken thereat, only I can say that during the few days which he
remained he gave great edification for his behaviour and sundry great testimonies
<pb n='cclxii'/><anchor id='Pgcclxii'/>
of his rare virtue, but most of all of his innocency concerning that crime
whereof he was imputed in the proclamation, about which himself procured
that his General should judicially examine in presence of divers witnesses,
commanding him <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in virtute sanctæ obedientiæ</foreign> to utter the truth therein to his
Superior, whereupon he swore and protested that he was wholly innocent
therein, which the rest of his behaviour doth easily make probable. I shall
cause him to be advertised by the first commodity of the note you write about
his friends.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pgccviii'>ccviii.</ref>&mdash;As Father Gerard certainly left Belgium in 1622, and therefore
could not have been in the Tertianship at Ghent in 1624, there must be a
mistake in the name of the Father who reconciled to the Church James, Lord
Maltravers, in the July of that year, as related in the <hi rend='italic'>Life of Anne Countess of
Arundel</hi> (p. 232). It is there said that <q>before his death he was so fortunate
as to be visited by Father John Gerard, a Priest of the Society, who, together
with others, lived there</q> [at Ghent] <q>in the house which his grandmother
a little before had erected.... By that Father he was in fine reconciled to
the Holy Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.&mdash;James Garney, servant to Sir Everard Digby, <q>confesseth the
journey to St. Winifred's Well and the particular places where they lay, and
that Darcy [Father Garnett] and Fisher [Father Percy] were with them, and
the whole company thirty horse</q> (Montacute Papers, f. 52).
</p>

<p>
Pp. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> and <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.&mdash;Father Ouldcorne in his letter to the Privy Council
(P. R. O., <hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 214) says respecting the verse of the
hymn of All Saints: <q>Also he [Father Garnett] told me they charged him
with a prayer that he should pen or make against the beginning of this
Parliament: but he said that he denied that ever he penned or made any such.
<q>Perhaps</q> (said he), <q>they have heard that sometimes this summer I have
wished Catholics to pray, for that we had cause to fear there would be more
severe laws made against us this Parliament than had been as yet. Or else
they have heard how sometimes upon occasions I have told how Cardinal
Allen had got an indulgence of Gregory XIII. for all those that did devoutly
for the conversion of England say that verse which is in the hymn of All-Hallow
Day, <hi rend='italic'>Gentem auferte perfidam</hi>, &amp;c., and the Psalm lxxviii., <hi rend='italic'>Deus
venerunt gentes</hi>.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.&mdash;Father Garnett to Anne Vaux from the Tower (P. R. O.,
<hi rend='italic'>Gunpowder Plot Book</hi>, n. 245). <q>Mr. Hall [Father Ouldcorne] dreamed that
Father General would have him and me professed. He said that I was
professed already. <q>Yea,</q> quoth he, <q>but I will have him professed of ten or
eleven vows more.</q> And there were provided two fair tabernacles or seats for
us. And so he awaked, and falling asleep again, had the same dream.</q> Anne
Vaux to Father Garnett (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, n. 246). <q>Mr. Hall his dream had been a
great comfort, if at the foot of the throne there had been a place for me. God
and you know my unworthiness. I beseech you help me with your prayers.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A Narrative Of The Gunpowder Plot.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Jesus Maria. The Preface.</head>

<p>
The blessed Apostle, Master, and Teacher of us Gentiles,
instructing the Romans in the cause and means of their
salvation, affirmeth, that God hath ordained we
must be conformed to the image of His Son, our Lord
and Saviour Jesus, <q>Et quos præscivit (saith he) et prædestinavit
conformes fieri imaginis filii sui.</q><note place='foot'><q>For whom He foreknew, He also predestinated to be made conformable
to the image of His Son</q> (Rom. viii. 29).</note> Upon which place
St. Jerome and other Doctors do teach that it is the
will of God, both in this life and in the next, to frame
and fashion us both in grace and glory unto that most
perfect pattern.
</p>

<p>
So that if we will reign with Christ, we must expect
to suffer with Him in the way unto His Kingdom, <q>si
compatimur et conglorificabimur: si commortui sumus
et convivemus; si sustinebimus et conregnabimus.</q><note place='foot'><q>If we be dead with Him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we
shall also reign with Him</q> (2 Tim. ii. 11).</note>
Yea, with that condition we are accepted, and
in that measure we must look to be rewarded, ut <q>sicut
socii passionum sumus, sic simus et consolationis.</q><note place='foot'><q>As you are partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be also of the
consolation</q> (2 Cor. i. 7).</note>
</p>

<p>
This, therefore, hath been the course and manner of
proceeding of Almighty God with His elected servants;
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
even from the beginning, and will continue unto the end
of the world. So when there were but two men born
upon the earth, and those brethren, yet one did persecute
the other, the wicked did kill the innocent. The
Patriarchs had all their several probations, and lived
but as pilgrims in the world; the Prophets sustained many
persecutions, and sundry of them were put to cruel deaths
for avouching the truth. The best and chosen part of
God's servants towards the end of the Old Testament were
proved and purged with many tribulations, they were
diversely tormented and slaughtered in such manner as
that saying of the Prophet David was justly applied unto
them, <q>Carnes sanctorum tuorum et sanguinem
ipsorum effuderunt in circuitu Jerusalem, et non erat
qui sepeliret.</q><note place='foot'><q>The flesh of Thy saints and the blood of them they have shed round
about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them</q> (1 Mach. vii. 17).</note> And St. Paul doth reckon up in few words
the many pressures both of those and other Saints of the
Old Testament, saying, <q>Lapidati sunt, secti sunt,
in occisione gladii mortui sunt, circuierunt in melotis,</q> etc.<note place='foot'><q>They were stoned, they were cut asunder, ... they were put to
death by the sword, they wandered about in sheep-skins,</q> &amp;c. (Heb. xi. 37).</note>
</p>

<p>
So that this being the case and condition of the
servants and Saints of God even before the law of grace,
much more may we expect, and it will be expected at
our hands, that seeing now our King and Captain, Christ
Jesus, doth go before us with a Cross, we should all, and
each of us in particular, both willingly and joyfully take
up our crosses and follow Him: seeing Truth Himself
came down from Heaven to lead us by Himself this way
unto life everlasting, good reason we should follow
Him in the same path, <q>quia nemo venit ad Patrem
nisi per eum.</q><note place='foot'><q>No man cometh to the Father but by Me</q> (St. John xiv. 6).</note> If Christ did confirm it by many scriptures,
<q>quod oportebat Christum pati, et sic intrare in
gloriam suam,</q><note place='foot'><q>Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into
His glory?</q> (St. Luke xxiv. 26).</note> much more must we contend to enter in at
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
the same gate, although it be narrow and strait,
especially seeing we enter not into our own but into
His glory. And it were a monstrous thing that the
head should go in at one door, and the parts of the
body in at another; neither can it be so, unless the
parts be divided from the head, and consequently not
quickened with the same spirit that giveth life to the
body, than which nothing in this world should be so
dreadful.
</p>

<p>
This made the Apostles willingly to accept of that
portion which Christ did leave them, as it were, for an
inheritance in this world, when he said, <q>In mundo
pressuram habebitis,</q> and again, <q>plorabitis et flebitis
vos, mundus autem gaudebit, vos autem contristabimini;</q><note place='foot'><q>You shall lament and weep, but the world shall rejoice, and you shall
be made sorrowful.... In the world you shall have distress</q> (St. John
xvi. 20, 33).</note>
that knowing well, that His promise was most assured,
and that their sorrow should be turned in gladness, <q>et
hoc gaudium nemo tolleret ab eis.</q><note place='foot'><q>And your joy no man shall take from you</q> (St. John xvi. 22).</note>
</p>

<p>
The same lesson have all the Saints of God learned and
in all ages have practised. The vineyard of Christ was watered
for 300 years together with continual showers of blood
running abundantly out of the holy veins of slaughtered
martyrs, from whence, although there did rise a plentiful
harvest of famous conversions and gain of souls, and at the
last succeeded the peace and propagation of the Church,
in so much that crowns and sceptres of Kings and Emperors
were submitted unto it, yet did not Peter's ship sail
long with a prosperous gale, though Christ were in
the ship, Who would not suffer it to sink; for He did
sleep again, and suffer the bark to be tossed with many
furious storms by Arians and other succeeding heretics
who rising in several ages did impugn the verity of
our Christian faith, as before the heathens had fought
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
against the divinity of the Father, so then the Arians
against the divinity and equality of the Son, and others
in their times and turns against the several articles of
the Creed, until the Grecians raised war also against
the third principal part thereof, denying the procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son; and lastly, now, towards
the end of the world, the heretics of our age, Luther
and his progeny, do perfect that imperfect work, and
fight against God's truth in the last articles of the Creed
with all their force. Wherein, although the fury of their
raging waves do beat in vain against the ship of Christ,
against which <q>nec portæ inferi prævalebunt,</q><note place='foot'><q>The gates of hell shall not prevail</q> (St. Matt. xvi. 18).</note> yet
is the ship in the meantime in the midst of the storm,
<q>motus autem magnus factus est in mari et navicula
operitur fluctibus.</q><note place='foot'><q>A great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was covered with
waves</q> (St. Matt. viii. 24).</note> And this much more in our
afflicted country of England for the present than in any
other, which now may justly be said to be that <q>stagnum
in quod descendit procella venti ita ut compleatur
navis nostra fluctibus et periclitamur.</q><note place='foot'><q>There came down a storm of wind upon the lake, and they were filled
and were in danger</q> (St. Luke viii. 23).</note> So that no
marvel though His disciples be there troubled, though
yet we should not be terrified, having Him ever present
with us, <q>qui imperat ventis et mari et obediunt ei,</q> and of
Whom it is truly said, <q>Ego dormio, et cor meum
vigilat.</q><note place='foot'><q>I sleep and My Heart watcheth</q> (Cant. v. 2).</note> For although He seem to wink for the time, and
to dissemble the injuries that are done unto His servants,
yet is His Heart awake, and His will doth both watch to
defend and ward us from evil in the meantime, and
He will in time, when He seeth it fit and best for us,
impose silence to our adversaries, and give peace to His
tried servants.
</p>

<p>
This is then the state of this present age, and this
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
the course which God hath ever continued from the first, to
purge and perfect His Church by oppositions, by tribulations
and afflictions; that He may hew the stones here hard
by the quarry, which must afterwards be placed in their
due order and ranks in His heavenly temple, where no
blows with the hatchet must once be given, no
sound of the hammer must be heard, that may hinder the
happiness or disturb the harmony of that heavenly city.
Here in this vale of misery all are beforehand fitted
and prepared (as the Church doth sing in a holy hymn
speaking of the like matter)&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Tunsionibus, pressuris,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Expoliti lapides,</l>
<l>Suis coaptantur locis</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Per manus artificis,</l>
<l>Disponuntur permansuri</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sacris ædificiis.<note place='foot'><q>Stones, polished smooth by blow and pressure, are fitted together each
in place by workman's hand, and set in order, ever to abide in the sacred
fane.</q></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And this being so, and so much to the advantage
of those who are so exercised and perfected by the same,
so prepared by crosses to receive crowns of everlasting
glory, we may gather thereby both what mind they
should be of, that are in the battle, and what their
thoughts and actions that are lookers-on.
</p>

<p>
For the first, no doubt but remembering Whose cause
it is we do sustain, Whom we have for our King and
Captain in the combat, and Who it is that hath promised
to assist us in our sufferings, and to reward and crown
us for our labours sustained and victories obtained in
this spiritual battle. [As<note place='foot'>The passages in this Preface enclosed in brackets are alterations in the
original MS. made in another but contemporary handwriting. The erasures in
the original are given in the footnotes.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> before hath been touched,]
there<note place='foot'>I say. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> is no doubt but we should think it most just and
requisite to sustain all difficulties in the cause of so great
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
and good a Lord, most honourable to follow such a
Captain, and most comfortable and commodious to serve
and suffer for such a [Master]<note place='foot'>Such a Lord and so true and liberal a paymaster. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> and so true and liberal a
[rewarder]; and therefore grant that we are bound by many
titles with ready will and earnest desire, yea, with
true contentment and assured confidence to bear the
poise of this persecution.
</p>

<p>
But it is no less apparent what in the meantime
should be conceived of our case, and what should be
performed by those that are not in the present labours
which we poor men are forced to sustain, nor under
the [scourge]<note place='foot'>Whip. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> which God for the time doth suffer to be
laid upon us. No doubt but they also should humble
themselves under the mighty hand of God, considering
that their time of temptation and trial
may also come (as it is an easy matter when one house
is on fire for the next neighbours' houses to [take the
same fire]<note place='foot'>To be inflamed. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note>), and withal that they are to conceive worthily
and honourably of their brethren, whom they now see
to be tried and purified in the furnace of many tribulations
by the heavenly goldsmith, thereby the better to beat
and fashion the metal of their eternal crowns; with whom
in the meantime they should concur and cooperate by
their charitable assistance in prayers and other helps.
</p>

<p>
This may well be thought to be their part, and so they
may expect to be partakers with us also in the retribution,
which we expect at the hands of God. So doth the Apostle
counsel the Corinthians, touching corporal assistance
to their absent and afflicted brethren. Having praised
the Macedonians for the like, he saith, <q>Non enim ut aliis
sit remissio, vobis autem tribulatio, sed ex æqualitate.
In præsenti tempore vestra abundantia illorum inopiam
suppleat, ut et illorum abundantia vestræ inopiæ sit supplementum,</q>
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
etc.<note place='foot'><q>For I mean not that others should be eased and you burthened, but by
an equality. In this present time let your abundance supply their want, that
their abundance also may supply your want</q> (2 Cor. viii. 13, 14).</note> In like manner may we desire and expect
help from our neighbours, that they out of the abundance
of their present peace and power to do us good, will help
in what they can, every one in that wherein he most aboundeth:
Princes with their power and authority, in being mediators
for us to our King for some mitigation of our afflictions;
courtiers, in often soliciting for this help at their Princes'
hands; the Clergy, by often offering the Divine Sacrifice,
and holding up their hands with Moses unto
God for us, that we may not faint in the battle; preachers,
by often commending our case unto the people; the
Religious, by applying their prayers and merit for the
continuance and increase of our constancy; and secular
persons, in such several manners as they are best able
to perform; the wise, in commending and justifying our
cause; the rich, in opening their purse unto our present
needs, and maintaining of such scholars as are preparing
in our seminaries to be workmen for the harvest. Yea,
the poorest and meanest sort of our Christian Catholic
brethren [abroad] may assist us much by their good wishes
and good words when occasion is offered; and all by
their daily prayers both to God and His Saints for us,
<q>ut possimus accipere armaturam Dei, et resistere
in die malo, et in omnibus perfecti stare,</q> etc.<note place='foot'><q>Take unto you the armour of God, that you may be able to resist in the
evil day and to stand in all things perfect</q> (Ephes. vi. 13).</note> And so
by this means assisting us about our tents and provision,
either in furnishing or in guarding the same, although they
be not present with us in the battle, yet will our just
David give them their share and part in our
victory and spoils, every one according to the measure
of his aid and assistance.
</p>

<p>
But here, if any do seem to complain of our want of
constancy and patience in suffering&mdash;and some perhaps
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
be rather ready to blame than to pity us, in regard of a
late attempt of some Catholic [gentlemen]<note place='foot'>Catholics. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> in our country,
most worthy indeed to be blamed and misliked [for the
rashness and temerity thereof]&mdash;we expect notwithstanding
more equity and charity at their hands than to condemn
the whole number for the error of a few, or to deem that
action the effect of all our desires, or fruit of our endeavours;
[whereas]<note place='foot'>For. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> the contrary is most true, and so testified by
the chief of the [conspirators themselves]<note place='foot'>Contrary party. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note>, and proved by
the process of all examinations and proceedings in law
against the [said] delinquents, as shall after appear.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sir Everard Digby
in clearing the Society.</note>
Yea, the [dealers]<note place='foot'>Actors. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> in that tragical device had so little
hope of help from other Catholics, either spiritual or
temporal, towards their designments in that plot, that
they neither did nor durst impart the same even to their
nearest and dearest friends, in whom otherwise they had
all confidence and trial both for secrecy and fidelity in
other matters, as the chiefest and wisest
amongst them all did testify at the bar in public audience.
Neither did any Priest once dream of the matter, or so
much as know of it by way of confession [or otherwise]
until the [whole plot was]<note place='foot'>Until the whole matter was plotted and prepared and had been without
doubt. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> contrived, and had been [by all
likelihood] put in execution if the Parliament had gone
forward on the first or second days in which it was
appointed. But when the said session was prorogued the
third time, and some of the conspirators in long delays,
[besides the general light which they presumed to have
drawn by certain obscure questions which to that end they
had proposed, though their purpose was not understood
by them that gave the answers,] were desirous to have
some [more particular] advice of some one or two of the
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
most learned and virtuous they could find, they opened
the matter in confession unto one of the Society, and by
him in like manner unto his Superior, with most strict
charge unto both of all secrecy, according to the privilege
and seal of that holy Sacrament. At which time the
Superior did not only charge the other to dissuade and
forbid that unlawful and inhuman action, but did likewise
by all lawful means himself seek to hinder it, as shall
appear in the sequel of [the ensuing narration]<note place='foot'>This discourse following. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note>.
</p>

<p>
If then they had neither help nor heartening, neither
counsel nor encouragement from any Catholic [man and
much less Priests, but rather to the contrary from]<note place='foot'>But the contrary from. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> those
few that by chance, and in that most secret manner, came
to know of it much against their will, how can it then
be laid unto the rest? How can others be blamed for it
where all were ignorant of the matter [except only the
said]<note place='foot'>But. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> two persons, and those did seek to hinder it with all
their power? Doth equity or charity permit to lay the
fault on those that were not guilty? or to attribute part
of the blame to those that were noways partakers in the
crime? Yea, doth not charity rather move the minds of
just men to take pity and compassion of those few that
were offenders [rather than] to be stirred with indignation
against them, and for their sakes against others that
are innocent? <q>Vera justitia (saith St. Gregory)
compassionem habet, falsa verò dedignationem.</q><note place='foot'><q>True justice hath compassion, but that which is false indignation.</q></note> And doth
not St. Bernard counsel us to excuse the fact if we can;
if not (as in this present matter where it is so apparent
to be evil), yet to excuse the intention; and in the hardest
and plainest case that may be, at least to search out
what motives and incentives they might have urging them
to such an error.
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
Truly, if we [may]<note place='foot'>Should. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> judge of their minds by the words
that came from them even when they had no hope of
life, or by all the signs that were to be seen either in
those that died in the field, or those that were put to
public justice, [at the very last instant of their lives,] we
should rather be moved to think that [not so much]<note place='foot'>No impatience but zeal. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> impatience
[as] zeal (although <q>non secundum scientiam</q>) did
stir them up to that strange and [violent]<note place='foot'>Desperate. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> attempt, for so
they all deeply and seriously protested at their death.
Assuming belike the Machabees for their example, who
seeing numbers of their brethren to suffer
patiently the unjust oppressions of their adversaries, answering
only in words unto them and saying, <q>Moriamur
omnes in simplicitate nostra et testes erunt super nos
cœlum et terra quod injuste perditis nos.</q><note place='foot'><q>Let us all die in our innocency, and heaven and earth shall be witnesses
for us that you put us to death wrongfully.</q> <q>If we shall all do as our
brethren have done, and not fight against the heathen for our lives and our
justifications, they will now quickly root us out of the earth.</q> 1 Mach. ii. 37, 40.</note> They would
not follow the example of their [said] brethren therein;
[but being of more intolerant heat and fervour than the
rest, said one to another]<note place='foot'>But said one to another. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note>, <q>Si omnes fecerimus sicut
fratres nostri fecerunt et non pugnaverimus pro animabus
nostris et justificationibus nostris, nunc citius disperdent
nos a terra.</q> This, [I say, seemed to have been in their
minds and apprehensions]<note place='foot'>This might seem to have come into their minds if we shall judge. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> if we may judge of them by
their carriage in their greatest extremities, with which also
they opened unto the world other motives [both at their
arraignment and death], which they thought to be of no
small moment; as the many and great calamities they
had long endured; the promises of toleration received
from the King, now contradicted both in word and action;
all hopes cut off of help from other Princes either by
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
force or favour, seeing many of them would not so much
as believe the persecution to be great, but rather give credit
to their persecutors' tales, seeking by all subtle means
and many instruments sent abroad for the purpose to
have the contrary believed in foreign countries; which, with
the general peace concluded [with all Catholic Princes
round about], and no peace granted to Catholics, but their
penalties increased, and like so to continue by the likelihood
of continuance of that flourishing issue with which
God hath blessed our King (which they thought did alter
the state of their sufferings very much from that it was
in Queen Elizabeth's time). These things did seem to
move them much, and as they thought necessarily to seek a
remedy, if not for themselves, yet for the relief of others,
which they being but a few, and out of hope of any help
from the most and best of the Catholics of England, could
not possibly effect, [as erroneously they conceived,] but
by some such stratagem, wherein the chiefest strength
should be resolution and secrecy, both which in the chosen
number of so few persons they thought abundantly provided
for. They took not indeed the course of the
Machabees, which they deemed in their case to be merely
impossible. But they affirmed their end to be same,
and their cause and reasons much more important. So
Catesby protested at his death in the field, and Digby
at the bar, that not for themselves but for the cause
of Christ; not for their wives and children, but for the
Church, the Spouse of Christ, and saving so many thousand
souls, the children of God, from eternal flames, they
attempted with fire to cut off the chiefest heads and only
causes of that greater ruin. <q>Yea,</q> said Digby [ready now
to die], <q>in respect of this cause, I little regard, or rather
I could be well content, both to offer my life and fortune
and also to have my posterity rooted out for ever.</q> So
that if we shall judge of these men by their zeal, or their
zeal by all the signs by which men's minds are judged
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
(especially in cases of extremity where human respects
give little cause to move dissimulation), we may the better
follow St. Bernard's rule and interpret charitably [with
compassion] their [final] intention, although [their immediate
motives were unlawful, and therefore] the action
for many and great respects neither was nor is to be
allowed.
</p>

<p>
And if St. Bernard did think this manner of interpretation
of others' actions to be requisite in the lovers of
charity, I hope then I may much more require that at
least others will support with patience that act of impatience
in that small number of our brethren and [not
impute it to the whole number of Catholics; no, nor
beyond the rule of charity to condemn the delinquents
themselves by extreme exclamations and maledictions,
as some do, but rather according to the Apostle's rule
in lenity of spirit to have pity of them, and reproving their
fact, esteem of their persons and other parts, as otherwise
they depend, of whom myself and many others can testify
that, setting aside this unfortunate evil action, by all good
men deplored, they were known and held, before they
fell into the same, to have been as wise, temperate, circumspect,
and devout gentlemen as commonly England
had, and such as would not have committed a voluntary
injury against any man for a world]<note place='foot'>That they will follow the rule of the Apostle, saying, <q>Fratres, si præoccupatus
fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos qui spirituales estis hujusmodi
instruite in spiritu lenitatis.</q> This is not to condemn them severely, to cry
out against them, to inveigh bitterly against the men and their minds and
intentions whatsoever: oh no, <q>in spiritu lenitatis,</q> saith the Apostle. We
that be Catholics in England do all with one voice grant the fact to be evil,
we neither did nor would for a world have concurred with the action; but we
pity the persons whom we knew to be otherwise wise and circumspect as any
they left behind them; yea, devout and zealous men as any one shall see in
a kingdom, and divers of them of so tender consciences that they would not to
save their life have deceived their neighbour of a penny, or wittingly have
admitted the least offence to God. <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note>.
</p>

<p>
Thus we disclaim from all participation of this [fact]
intended by a few in their deceived zeal. Yet we follow
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
not the example of those that will not follow the rule
of charity in their judgments. And much more we do
and may stand upon the justice of our cause, and prove
that it is altogether against the rules of reason, justice,
and charity, to lay the fault of a few upon the whole
number of Catholics in that country; who neither did nor
would have concurred, nor were partakers either by work
or will in so barbarous a cruelty intended: no, nor so
much as imagined there could enter such a thought into
the hearts of any of their company.
</p>

<p>
The verity whereof with the innocency of all Catholics
in that respect will plainly appear by the narration following
of the whole matter how it passed, which at the
earnest request of some principal friends on that side the
sea I am moved to set down. And although I know myself
much less able than they imagine to pen it in such
manner as the greatness of the matter and rareness of
such an event deserveth, yet I hope to satisfy their desire
for the matter itself, if not their expectation for the
manner of handling, promising to [set down] the story
truly as it passed, without partiality to the one or other
side; and to conceal no circumstance (whereof I could
have sufficient information) which may truly explain the
intentions, actions, and events of the whole matter, wherein
I had perhaps more helps to know both many and true
particulars than others could easily procure.
</p>

<p>
The whole I intend and offer to God's glory and the
good of souls: desiring only this of the pious reader, that
as I will perform my part in truth and fidelity in the
whole narration, so he will not be wanting of his part
to perform the rules of equity and charity both towards
me and the matter I write of; especially towards those
that in so honourable a manner do daily and hourly
sustain the cause and quarrel of Christ, not only <q>in<note place='foot'>Not only <q>in the sun and dust</q> but <q>in blood</q> also and <q>many
wounds.</q></note> sole
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
et pulvere,</q> but <q>in sanguine,</q> also <q>et vulneribus multis.</q>
And so <q>alter alterius onera portantes adimplebimus
legem Christi.</q><note place='foot'><q>Bear ye one another's burdens, and so you shall fulfil the law of Christ</q>
Gal. vi. 2.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Or thus it may end:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
And so we suffering for the cause and they assisting in the
cause <q>alter alterius onera portantes</q> (according to the counsel
of the Apostle) <q>adimplebimus legem Christi.</q> And being with
charity joined in the works of grace we shall by the author of
charity be conjoined in the rewards of glory, <q>quæ
præparavit Deus diligentibus se.</q>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. [I.]
The State Of Persecuted Catholics At The Queen's
Death And The King's Entry, With Their Hopes
Of Relaxation By Him, Whereof They Failed.</head>

<p>
I was desirous by the former chapter to make known
unto you the state of things how they passed in England
until the end of Queen Elizabeth's reign; wherein though
I was more long than I had thought to be, yet little methinks
is said in comparison of that feeling which we must
needs have that live here, and see daily before our eyes
<q>abominationem desolationis stantem in loco sancto;</q><note place='foot'><q>The abomination of desolation standing in the holy place</q> (St. Matt.
xxiv. 15).</note> that
have so many causes to put us often in mind of the
glory and splendour of the Church robbed and spoiled
by the first schism under King Henry, overthrown and
defaced by heresy, beginning to prevail under King
Edward; and wholly trodden upon and cruelly persecuted
during all the long reign of Queen Elizabeth, in which
all means were used that policy could invent, or power
perform, to root out all Catholics and Catholic religion
out of England.
</p>

<p>
To which effect they continually devised and imposed
all kinds of penalties upon such as would profess the
Roman Faith. They made sundry and most severe statutes
(as may appear in the end of this book) against
all practice of Catholic religion. They made it death
to receive the absolution of a Priest; yea, death to harbour
a Priest in house, or to give him a cup of drink, or any
assistance in his need; death to persuade any to the
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
Catholic religion. They laid the premunire, which is a
punishment worse than death, for keeping an Agnus Dei,
or hallowed grains, or such like comforts of soul, that
come from Rome. Finally, whatsoever the wit or malice
of the least pitiful hearts could find out, all that was
inflicted and laid upon our backs. For commonly they
were such that were put in authority, either in searches,
or examinations, or executions&mdash;such were authorized,
such were countenanced, and borne out whatsoever insolencies
they committed against us, of which infinite
examples might be alleged. As for death itself, though
it was the ordinary pain of the law against Catholics for
practice of their Faith (acts of religion being now made
acts of treason), and so came often in practice; yet was
it not so heavy a load as we felt by the other laws,
and the outrageous execution of them, in far worse sort
than yet the laws permitted or had devised against us.
True it is they put to cruel death many and worthy
persons. One famous and religious Queen, mother to this
King who now reigneth&mdash;an act not oft recorded in other
persecutions, though never so severe. One also of the
ancient Earls they put to death in like manner by the
sword; two or three others of the chiefest whilst they
were in prison. Other noblemen died in banishment; and
many persons of great families and estimation were at
several times put to death under pretence of treason,
which also was their cloak to cover their cruelties against
such Priests and Religious as were sent into England
by authority from His Holiness to teach and preach the
Faith of Christ and to minister the Sacraments. But he
that would endeavour those things in this time was not
<q>amicus Cæsaris,</q><note place='foot'><q>Cæsar's friend</q> (St. John xix. 12).</note> and as such, both the Priest himself
must be condemned and he that would show him any
favour.
</p>

<p>
Of this kind the number was great that suffered (our
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
difficulty considered in preparing them, and penury of
so fit workmen), but their worth was much greater than
this short treatise can or may contain: it is worthily
reserved for a more full discourse, and indeed it will
require a just volume by itself. It shall suffice us here
to know, that as all were holy and full of spirit, fit for
men that are sent in such an Apostolical mission, so many
of them excelled in rare gifts, and for such were known
and esteemed highly by Catholics before their apprehension.
There was of them a Campian, so eloquent, and so much
overmatching the heretics in public disputation (although
they came fully armed and provided against a prisoner
after tortures, preparing himself to die), that a courtier
went from the disputation presently to the Queen, and
said if that man were suffered to live he were enough
to pervert the whole realm. Convert, they would have
said, but that heresy would not permit their tongue to
tell the truth. There died with him a most valiant
Sherwin, full of St. Laurence his fervent spirit, and ten
other Priests, redoubted servants of Christ, each one
singular in their kind. Amongst whom one other was
of the Society, called Brian; a man of such devotion
to the Passion of Christ, that when he was extremely
racked before his martyrdom, his mind being fixed in
the meditation of Christ His Passion, he felt not their
torments, nor any pain but only a little in one hand,
upon a lively impression he then had of the pain our
Lord suffered when His holy hands were pierced. What
should I reckon up a Cornelius, so famous in preaching
that all Catholics followed him as children do their nurse
when they long for milk, and the man so full of the
Apostle's charity, that with one fervent speech in imitation
of the offer which St. Paul made to be <q>anathema pro
fratribus,</q><note place='foot'><q>I wished myself to be an anathema from Christ for my brethren</q>
(Rom. ix. 3).</note> he expelled a devil out of a person whom he
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
was exorcising. I know the time and place where it was
performed; and where another wicked spirit confessed in a
possessed person that his fellow was cast out by Cornelius
his charity. This good Father was the third of the
Society which suffered death by public justice for profession
of the Catholic Roman Faith.
</p>

<p>
What a famous man, and how much beloved was
Father Southwell! whose excellent parts England cannot
forget; and if it would be so ungrateful, yet his works
there extant, so full of spirit and eloquence both in prose
and verse, would suffice abundantly to make the cruelty
of his persecutors much accused, and his life so shortened
much lamented, who living would have been so profitable
and pleasing to all sorts. His value and high merit
before God was much to be seen, in that he was delivered
over by God's ordinance to encounter hand to hand the
cruelest tyrant of all England, Topliffe, a man most
infamous and hateful to all the realm for his bloody and
butcherly mind; and this man had Father Southwell many
weeks together in his house alone to use him at his
pleasure, where he kept him in his boots as he was
taken, with bolts of iron upon his arms, and in a chamber
without any bed or straw to lie upon, where he was to
turn himself upon his side, and lie upon the floor like
a dog when he list to sleep, as full of lice as he might
hold. There also he put him nine times most cruelly
upon the torture, which Father Southwell at his arraignment
professed was more grievous to him than nine deaths
could or would have been. About that time also suffered
at York another famous Priest of the Society called Father
Henry Walpole, whom first they had tortured fourteen
times in the Tower, and that in very extreme manner.
This gentleman was known to be of excellent parts before
his going over to take that happy course of Religious life,
in so much that with his sweet conversation and devout
carriage he won divers to be Catholics even then before
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
he was Priest, and it was expected he would have proved
an excellent workman in that harvest, if the cruelty of
heresy had not cut him off. But his merits were such
as God would defer his crown no longer, and so at his
first landing he was apprehended in the north, and therefore
carried thither again to be executed, after they
had in vain made trial at London to make him confess
by torments something against the state of Catholics
and their profession or practice. When he came to die
all men admired his patience, and religious humility, and
mortification, wherein he very much excelled.
</p>

<p>
It were too long, and not for this place to reckon
up the great number of rare men both Religious and
Secular Priests that suffered in Queen Elizabeth's times,
<q>quibus dignus non erat mundus.</q><note place='foot'><q>Of whom the world was not worthy</q> (Heb. xi. 31).</note> But yet this persecution
by death, though it were cruel to them that suffered,
and most injurious to the Catholics that were by that
means bereaved of their most beloved Fathers, yet were
the persecutions in other respects more grievous to be
borne and much more intolerable. Their torturing of
men when they were taken to make them confess their
acquaintance and relievers, was more terrible than death
by much, as Bl. Father Southwell professed at the bar;
and this the rather both because the pain continued longer
and was often iterated, and chiefly for that it was not
an end of their probation in this world, but many after
such torments are forced to walk on their voyage towards
Heaven for many years, being uncertain of their perseverance
in that estate of fervent love to God with which
they offered themselves for Him to torments, and would
more gladly have done it unto death, if such had been
His pleasure at that time.
</p>

<p>
Besides the spoiling and robbing laymen of their
livings and goods, with which they should maintain their
families, is to many more grievous than death would be,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
when those that have lived in good estate and countenance
in their country shall see before them their whole life
to be led in misery, and not only themselves, but their
wives and children to go a-begging. And some, in like
manner, that lose not all at once, but have somewhat
left, are worse than the rest, for they have not so much
as is proportionable to their charge, and yet being known
to have something, can have no colour to live on alms,
as others do (even some of very worshipful families), and
live much better than diverse of these that have this
little left them.
</p>

<p>
And to these the continual and cruel searches, which
I have found to be more terrible than taking itself. The
insolencies and abuses offered in them, and in the seizures
of goods, the continual awe and fear that men are kept
in by the daily expectance of these things, sith every
malicious man (of which heresy can want no plenty) is
made an officer in these affairs, and every officer a King,
as it were, to command and insult upon Catholics at
their pleasure. These, and the like aggrievances, Catholics
having now sustained during the whole reign of Queen
Elizabeth, was it not now time for them to hope that
God would say unto them, <q>Levate capita vestra quia ecce
appropinquat redemptio vestra?</q><note place='foot'><q>Lift up your heads because your redemption is at hand</q> (St. Luke
xxi. 25).</note> We had now suffered
more than the full number of years, not days, of this
deluge of persecution pouring down upon us. Was it
not now time for us to look out and to long that the
earth would begin to dry and afford us some quiet habitation
upon it? Were we not now to expect that some
gracious bird would bring us an olive branch in sign of
peace, which we had looked for so long and desired so
much? True it is that most Catholics had great hope
and expectation of this King James, then King of Scotland
only. And this hope, as a human help of no small force,
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
did join with God's grace and bring some comfort with
it, amidst the many discomforts sustained under the long-continued
reign of Queen Elizabeth.
</p>

<p>
First, they did, and might, expect that the son of
such a mother (who not only lived a Catholic in her
kingdom and in prison, but died also because she was a
Catholic) would himself also be a friend to Catholics at
least, if he would not be a follower of Catholic religion.
St. Monica, by her tears and prayers, did win her son,
St. Augustin; the hope was also in England that <q>filius
tantorum meritorum perire non poterat.</q><note place='foot'><q>The son of such great merits could not perish.</q></note> And who could
think that the son would join in friendship and confidence
with them, and with only them that had betrayed and
slain both his father and mother, and who had kept
himself so long like a ward in his own kingdom. Besides
they could see no cause why King James should follow
the course that Queen Elizabeth had done. For she in
the beginning of her reign was persuaded by her Council
that for reason of State it was needful she should break
with the See Apostolic and maintain the new religion,
that might depend upon her supremacy and supreme
authority expressed by the laws of Parliament. This
they pretended to be needful, first, in respect of her
nativity, which they knew was not esteemed legitimate
by the See of Rome. Again, in regard of the particular
favour which it was known the same See did bear unto
Queen Mary, then Dowager of France and Queen of
Scotland, living and reigning there in all prosperity; who
therefore was much envied and feared by Queen Elizabeth
and her Council at that time. Unto which also was
added the well-known affection of all Catholics in England
unto the said Queen Mary, in respect of her true descent
from King Henry VII. and her constant love and profession
of the Catholic faith: these seemed great motives
to Queen Elizabeth, and sufficient to lead her into the
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
labyrinth of an heretical course. But these could not be
objected unto our King James, who was the true and
hopeful issue of his so worthy mother and the same so
glorious a martyr. Neither could he fear the favour or
furtherance of the See Apostolic, which favoured him
much and assisted him many ways whilst yet he was
but King of Scotland and professed a contrary faith.
What might he then have expected if he had offered
himself and his realm of England unto the obedience of
the Church, if he had trodden that path which all his
ancestors had walked, and wherein both they and the
kingdom of England did so much flourish. Yea, what
applause, what congratulation, what assurance of friendship
and assistance against all his enemies might he
have expected as most certain, both from His Holiness,
and the like from all Christian Princes? Yea, truly,
this seemed so strong a reason to induce His Majesty
to that happy course, that many Catholics, knowing his
wisdom and learning, could not persuade themselves how
it could be possible that he would be drawn to any other
manner of proceeding, especially seeing that as on the
one side all peace with the Christian world was sure to
be knit in firmest league of friendship; on the other side,
they could not see how he could expect any long or
assured peace with the pillars of God's Church, if he
should begin to persecute the same afresh, as the late
Queen had done before him. For it were in vain to begin
that war against the Church, if he meant not to do his
best endeavours to root out the same out of the world,
if he could; because he might be sure the more he proceeded
therein the more he would exasperate both God
and all good men against him. This mind Catholics
could not expect in a Prince of so great judgment and
so many good parts, as they had cause to think him to
be of. These hopes also were much strengthened by his
own words, published unto the world in that fatherly and
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
princely gift of his unto his son, wherein amongst many
other grave and wise documents unto the young Prince,
one is, that he do cherish and make much of those servants
whom he hath known to be faithful unto his parents, of
which his counsel he first giveth divers true and judicial
reasons, and afterwards confirmeth the same with his own
experience, affirming in plain words he found those most
true and trusty to himself who had been faithful followers
of hers, and so on the contrary side in like manner. To
this effect His Majesty delivered his mind unto his son,
and therewith great and comfortable hopes unto all
Catholics, that they who had been true lovers and followers
of his mother should find favour, and that such as had
either done or suffered greatly in her service should find
an answerable requital and advancement.
</p>

<p>
These hopeful signs of future favour were yet much
in particular confirmed by the constant report and asseveration
of divers, who in the said Queen Elizabeth's reign
had lived under His Majesty in Scotland, as well English
as of the Scottish nation, who did everywhere affirm and
divulge both at home and abroad, and in all Princes'
Courts of the world (as it is well known to the said
Princes), the great and singular hope and expectation
that was to be conceived of this King for his good nature
and rare parts, as mansuetude, compassion, equanimity,
high esteem of his said mother and of all those that had
faithfully loved and served her. And albeit that for his
religion he could be no other than as he had been brought
up and instructed, yet was he averse from all severity of
persecution against such as were of different religion,
especially the Catholic; granting it to be the ancient
mother religion of all the rest, though in some things now
amiss in his opinion. And that out of his own reading
he had observed that all his ancestors, Kings and Queens
both of England and Scotland, without exception had
been of the Catholic Roman faith and religion, and that
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
himself was the first among them all that ever professed
a different religion from them. These reports were spread
by many and in many places. But some others more
particular and assured are said to have been sent by
particular embassagies and letters from His Majesty unto
other Princes, giving hope at least of toleration to Catholics
in England, of which letters divers were translated this
year into French and came so into England, as divers
affirmed that had seen them. Yea, and further than
this, I am well assured that immediately upon Queen
Elizabeth's sickness and death, divers Catholics of note
and fame, Priests also, did ride post into Scotland, as
well to carry the assurance of dutiful affection from all
Catholics unto His Majesty as also to obtain his gracious
favour for them and his royal word for confirmation of
the same. At that time, and to those persons, it is certain
he did promise that Catholics should not only be quiet
from any molestations, but should also enjoy such liberty
in their houses privately as themselves would desire, and
have both Priests and Sacraments with full toleration and
desired quiet. Both the Priests that did kneel before him
when he gave this promise (binding it with the word of
a Prince, which he said was never yet broken), did protest
so much unto divers from whom I have it. And divers
others, persons of great worth, have assured me the same
upon the like promise received from His Majesty, both
for the common state of Catholics and their own particular.
</p>

<p>
Now, more than this I think could not be, to give
assured hope unto Catholics of some present relaxation
by his gracious help from the many miseries and afflictions
they had so long endured, being as much as they could
expect or he perform until his settling. How ready
Catholics were in all countries to receive him for their
King, how forward to proclaim him, yea, how joyful to
entertain and welcome him with all care and cost that
might be, all the realm is witness. Insomuch that some
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
set vessels of wine in the streets for all comers to drink,
in show of their gladness; other Catholic noblemen at
London cast store of money about the streets in sign of
their universal joy. What cost all sorts of Catholics
bestowed upon such furniture as was fit to welcome and
meet both King and Queen, with the Prince who came
at several times! All was done with such applause and
jubilee as did well witness the joy and hopes they had
conceived.
</p>

<p>
But now what shall we think to have been the state
of all Catholic minds when all these hopes did vanish
away; and as a flash of lightning, giving for the time a
pale light unto those that sit in darkness, doth afterwards
leave them in more desolation? What grief may we
imagine they felt generally, when not only no one of
these hopes did bring forth the hoped fruit, nor any
promise was performed, but when, on the contrary side,
His Majesty did suffer himself to be guided and as it
were governed by those that had so long time inured
their hands and hardened their hearts with so violent
a persecution; yea, when he did not only confirm the
former laws with which we were afflicted, but permitted
new and more grievous vexations to fall upon us than
before we had felt, and prepared yet more and more heavy
whips wherewith to scourge us? Truly the event proved
contrary to all our hopes. For, first, it was observed
that some weeks after his being in England, he began
to use far different speech of and against Catholics than
was expected from the son of such a mother. And when
soon afterward there ensued his first Parliament, he made
a bitter speech (now extant in print) against them all;
but especially, to our greater increase of grief and despair
of comfort, against the See Apostolic, much different from
that was expected, where so great favours and tokens of
love had been received.
</p>

<p>
Now, whereas Catholics expected his published and
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
promised honour to his mother and rewards unto her
servants, it grieved them much when they saw no memory
at all made of so memorable a mother either in word or
work; she lying until this day obscurely in that place
where her enemies cast her after cutting off her head:
nor any man gratefully looked on or respected that
belonged unto her or that made mention of her. As for
those that did or suffered anything in her cause and
quarrel, there is not any advanced nor yet recompensed
for the great losses which some of them sustained in her
behalf. Not long after the said Queen's imprisonment
in England, there were three, two knights and one gentleman,
that intended her deliverance and assistance to her
settling again in her kingdom of Scotland [one of the
three was Sir Thomas Stanley, next brother to the Earl of
Derby, who had much land and many friends in that
country where she was prisoner; the second was Sir
Thomas Gerard, whose dwelling-house was within two
miles of the castle where she was kept, and at that time
had means sufficient to do good service in that behalf;
the third was one Mr. Roulston, an esquire of good
worth in the same country, and a very devout Catholic
man and a stout gentleman].<note place='foot'>The passage within brackets is erased in the original.</note> The meanest of which
three had a son, being then a pensioner in the Court, who
betrayed the whole matter and caused them all to be
clapt in the Tower, where they were kept a long time
in strait prison, and Mr. Roulston was condemned to die,
against whom they were able it is likely to prove more
particulars of the secret (by his son's means), than against
the others. But it cost the others large sums of money
and sale of land before they could be freed.
</p>

<p>
After this, about twenty years ago, there was another
matter intended by fourteen gentlemen, Mr. Babington,
Mr. Salesberie, and others of the choice of England, for
the said Queen's deliverance and restoring to her right;
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
wherein, though they were ensnared and entrapped by
some politic heads that sought both their overthrow
and thereby a seeming justifiable pretence to cut off the
said Queen also, yet it was apparent by their examinations
and executions, taking their death in so devout
and resolute manner, that they intended sincerely the
Queen's delivery for the advancement of the Catholic
cause. At the same time, also, one of the foresaid knights<note place='foot'>Sir Thomas Gerard. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in orig.</hi></note>
was again committed to the Tower for the same cause, and
kept there at least two years, though he had been so
wary of his trust that they could not prove anything
against him to put him to death with the rest; but it
cost him much this time again, as that prison is ever
wont to do to those that live in it, but especially to those
that get out. Nor these nor any others of like deserts
in other kind have been rewarded. True it is that the
elder son of the knight,<note place='foot'>Sir Thomas Gerard. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in orig.</hi></note> going to meet the King at
his coming into England, His Majesty told him before
divers (from whom I had it), <q>That he must love his
blood, for that he and his had suffered persecution for
him.</q> These were his words, showing indeed in His
Majesty a good consideration of his servants and inclination
to do for them; but it is likely that others overrule
the matter, for,<note place='foot'>Underlined <hi rend='italic'>in orig.</hi> probably for erasure.</note> though he made that gentleman knight
at that time, yet that was to him no advancement whose
ancestors had been so for sixteen or seventeen descents
together; but since he hath had no preferment at all,
but rather kept back, as being known that his house
hath ever been Catholic, though himself having long time
followed the Court do not profess it as he should.
</p>

<p>
Another<note place='foot'>This whole paragraph is marked in the original.</note> worthy gentleman also, one Mr. Abington, was
in the Tower for the same cause when the fourteen gentlemen
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
were there prisoners. And this gentleman, having lately
some Priests taken in his house, was condemned to die;
and though his life be spared for a time (they say, in
respect of his former suffering; but, indeed, obtained by
the Lord Mounteagle, whose sister he hath married), yet
is his house taken from him, one of the fairest in all
the country, and all his lands and goods forfeited: which
is much more grievous than death to a man of his devotion
and resolution. These and many such examples are seen
and noted in the realm, and not any seen to be advanced
nor regarded that truly served or suffered for his mother:
yea, rather the contrary; that His Majesty was so prevented
and preoccupated with divers that pursued and
both sought and wrought the ruin of his mother, that he
seemed to give himself wholly into their hands, and not
only himself but Catholics also, to be afflicted by them
at their pleasure.
</p>

<p>
All this, we say, moved great exasperation and exulceration
of minds, mixed with grief and despair, foreseeing
that all would pass worse for Catholics under his reign
than in Queen Elizabeth's time; when those that did
persecute under her were doubtful what side might prevail
or bear sway after her death, and therefore would be
more sparing, and divers would seek to make the
principal Catholics their friends against those times of
uncertain event, which could not be far off in respect of
the great age of Queen Elizabeth and her want of issue;
whereas now no such fear is thought needful nor any
such caution in policy requisite, the King being young
and his issue like to continue and to uphold their proceedings:
so that they may more freely and without
fear persecute at their pleasure. Besides unto this general
fear, which all Catholics had in seeing these former hopes
of theirs to fail them, was added a full experience that
neither hopes were to be by them expected nor promises
by others to be performed. For whereas His Majesty,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
out of his gracious disposition, had promised much favour
towards Catholics, both to other Princes and to divers
particular Catholics that went unto him before his coming
in, now the contrary was so much practised and all these
promised favours so plainly denied, that they might not
be so much as once spoken of or remembered that ever
any such had been.
</p>

<p>
For, first, when at the end of the first Parliament
the Puritans packed together therein, as well against
His Majesty and his desires in the matter of union of
the two kingdoms as also against the Catholics, and
urged many new laws to their prejudice and for their
greater affliction, His Majesty, that with one word might
have staid their fury by saying (as it is accustomed in
such cases when a Prince will show favour) that he would
deliberate and consider of the matter, he confirmed first
all the most sharp and rigorous laws and statutes which
the late Queen or her father or brother had made against
Catholics for afflicting them or shedding their blood.
And, secondly, he adjoined new statutes of his own that
augmented greatly the grievances of the former (which
afterwards shall be set down), so as every sort of men,
but especially the Puritans (that by all means desired
to make the King odious unto Catholics), applied unto
them presently those words of the young King Roboam
to his aggrieved people&mdash;<q>My father pressed you with a
grievous yoke; but I will aggravate the same yet more.
My father beat you with whips; but I will scourge you
with scorpions.</q> So that it is easy to guess
with what terror and affliction the Catholics remained
at that time. By all which we may plainly see, that
not only all hopes were failed whereupon Catholics did
build their comforts, but that it was also seriously
endeavoured by some to give now all assurance of the
contrary opinion, and so to drive men to despair, presuming
perhaps that some amongst so many thousands
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
would not be so patient as to bear it long, but that
despair would urge them to some desperate attempt,
whereby the chief causers of this persecution might give
the better pretence of the cruelty they intended against
them for the satisfaction of foreign Princes, that they
might suppose these laws to be afterwards devised and
not before determined or practised. And it is no marvel
though divers Princes have been long in this error, knowing
not the state of things with us; yea, rather being possessed
of a contrary opinion to the truth of our sufferings
by instruments employed of purpose, as also their whole
estates were in like manner by the ordinary news, which
were written in the gazettes to the end to be divulged.
But Catholics that felt the smart before, had cause to
believe the contrary, and that they received<note place='foot'>Were first beat till they cried, and then beaten for crying. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in
orig.</hi></note> one blow
upon the face with the fist, to make them fetch another
against the wall. Yea, it is verily thought by many of
the wiser sort, that these very things, with others that
followed, were the spurs that set those gentlemen upon
that furious and fiery course which they afterwards fell
into; and being otherwise too forward of themselves, and
not apt in those things to be retained with the bridle,
did urge them to take the bit in their teeth and run
headlong (being thus filled with despair of any good
from this King's government) to that desperate course
of cutting off the same to set up one of his younger
children&mdash;a thing very much lamented by all the body of
Catholics in England, whose thoughts were only bent
how to possess their souls in patience, notwithstanding
all the causes of grief and despair of remedy which I
have alleged, and more that I must allege in the chapter
following.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. [II.]
The Increase Of Persecution And All Kind Of
Molestations Unto Catholics, With Their Failing
Of All Hopes, Procured By The Puritan
Faction.</head>

<p>
Such as be acquainted with the state of affairs in England
cannot be ignorant that there be many at this time of the
Puritan faction put in authority and place of government,
especially concerning the persecution of Catholics. All
which, as they be further gone in heresy than the ordinary
sort of moral Protestants be, so are they more violent
enemies against all Catholics and Catholic proceedings.
And this not only in respect of that spirit of heresy,
which doth in greater measure possess them, but for
reason of policy also they hold it very requisite. For
although the Protestants are at this time the chief in
Government, and their laws and ordinances preferred both
in ecclesiastical and secular causes, yet are not the Puritans
out of hope (if the Catholic party were taken away) to
prevail against them in time, either by force or friendly
means procured from their complices in other countries,
in which kind they are much stronger than the Protestants,
or else by force of argument and the Word, wherein they
persuade themselves to have great power. And true it is,
that under the pretence of more pure profession of Calvin's
doctrine and a greater outward show of a more formal
religion, they do win daily some or other new-fangled
heads unto their sect from the Protestants, whose grounds
are more uncertain to themselves, and nothing certain
unto them but the following of the will and pleasure of
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
those that guide the State, whatsoever they hold or ordain
to be professed or practised. But as for the Catholics,
they are holden and tried by the Puritans and the other
also to be inflexible for matter of their faith, as having
most sure and infallible grounds to rest upon, alleging
for the same all kind of authority, showing antiquity
with universal consent of all nations; and remaining now,
as others of their side have done before them, in perfect
union amongst themselves in all points of their belief.
So that the Puritans having no hope at all that ever
their private spirit shall be able to prevail against such
an army of impregnable proofs by force of reason or
argument they seek therefore, by all means they can
devise, the overthrow of Catholics much more earnestly
than the Protestants do, who are in themselves commonly
less violent; and being placed at the helm in the chief
seats for commodity and honour, are content to rest when
they are well, and are not so busy and stirring as the
Puritans are, whose rising spirit cannot be at rest until
they be in possession of that which the others enjoy and
they desire. Hereupon it followeth that the Puritans are
most forward continually to incense the King against us;
most violent also to execute all laws, and lay all kind of
molestations and afflictions upon us, and besides most
desirous of all occasions whereby to put us utterly in
despair of help or favour, and so to force some or other
to unfit courses, that the rest may be punished for their
sake. And truly, as they were the men that did frame
the Bills against us in the first Parliament after the King's
entry, and did follow the matter most hotly to have both
the former cruel laws remain in force and new penalties
imposed upon Catholics, so when His Majesty had granted
and confirmed all their desires against us, it is strange
to see with what fury they sought in all places to execute
the same cruelties&mdash;yea, much further in most places than
the laws themselves did allow or would permit. And it
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
is to be noted, that although the Puritans are not generally
put in authority or used for the government of the Commonwealth
(as men known to bear but hollow hearts unto
the King, and to be much disgusted with his proceedings),
yet are they ordinarily employed in the punishing and
executing all kind of rigour against Catholics, as being
tried by experience to be most vigilant in finding them
out, most violent in afflicting them and most pitiless in
their pains. So that in every shire, those Justices which
be known to be most forward in the Puritan faction,
though otherways they be little employed in matters of
the country or esteemed of by the State, yet they are
the men that are put in commission against Catholics&mdash;they
are the searchers, they are the informers, they are
the Judges, and they are made, as it were, the kings
of Catholics.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Execution of penal laws
upon Catholics.</note>
From hence it came that the pressures of Catholics
were much increased after the first Parliament and
before that rash attempt of those gentlemen who
were urged to that conspiracy (as most men think in
those parts that know how things passed) by extremities
which they saw to increase so fast, and their despair of
helps in vain expected. For then presently, the execution
of all laws against Catholics, both old and new, being
committed for the most part to the Chief Justice, who
is known to be hot and vehement in the Puritan faction
and a bloody enemy to the said Catholics; and he, by
direction of others and his own desire, having picked out
men in every shire of the same humour to execute the
same laws with all the rigour and despite they could
devise. Then followed afresh the exaction
of 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Interlined</hi> 80 crowns <hi rend='italic'>and in another hand</hi> 88 at least.</note> a month, which was imposed by Queen
Elizabeth upon every Catholic that would not go unto
their service, although for a time after the King's coming
there was hope given both by King and Council that it
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
should not be exacted: but then the whole was urged
together with the arrearages. Yea, and not contented with
twelve months in the year (as Nature hath appointed by
course of the sun), they would have the payment for
thirteen months in the year, after the account of four
weeks in the month, contrary to the rule of ancient law
affirming that <hi rend='italic'>Pœnæ non sunt ampliandæ</hi>. But if Catholics
could enjoy for this payment any reasonable quiet, they
would think themselves in great ease. But there is a
law for the poorer sort of Catholics, that they shall forfeit
two parts of their lands and leases, and all their goods
and chattels whatsoever that can be found; upon which
law (being executed as the Puritans use to do) many
and great molestations do further ensue; for by this
means they are not only indicted and cast into jails and
prisons and their lands seized, as the statute alloweth,
but also their goods embezzled and their cattle driven
away. And if they find no cattle which they are assured
to be the recusants', but that his fields be rented and
stocked by other men, they drive that cattle also and
put them to prove whose they were; and thereby terrify
all men from hiring their said lands, wherein they also
add diverse other particular afflictions that exasperate
greatly the sufferer. These matters being committed
for the most part to their handling, that care not how
much or how far they strain poor Catholics, whereof no
marvel if it come to pass according to the proverb&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Qui
nimium emungit elicit sanguinem</hi>&mdash;<q>He that scrapeth or
rubbeth too much, draweth blood at last.</q>
</p>

<p>
It hath been also a matter of no small grief and complaint,
that whereas there be now in England certain hungry
and ravenous people that importuned the King for relief,
having no rents or revenues in the land and yet living at
a high rate and great charges many ways, His Majesty to
give them content hath willed them to seek out Popish
recusants which he might bestow upon them; wherein they
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
then become diligent to inquire them out and restless
in prosecuting them to the uttermost, and think all they
can get too little: as it is indeed too little to satisfy
their needs; which was a thing foreseen and foretold by
some who yet are no prophets nor sons of prophets, but
Protestants of the wiser sort, who, as it is said, when it
was consulted of amongst all the Peers of the realm,
before the King's coming, concerning his admission to
the crown, some amongst them alleged that it might
well be feared that the lean and hungry oxen which
Pharao saw in his dream would devour all the fat and
goodly oxen which their English fertile ground had fed
so well before, and that these ravenous beasts would eat
them up and yet seem to be nothing satisfied. Thus they.
</p>

<p>
And truly the meaner sort of these to whom
Catholics were thus given, were not satisfied with the
Catholics they could find out, but they also procured
divers to be presented and indicted for recusants who
were but well-wishers unto Catholics and went to church
themselves; and yet some of them could not be delivered
except they would publicly abjure their faith at the
Assizes and Sessions, whereof sundry rueful examples
might be given. In all which, the case seemeth to divers
both grievous and odious, that true and freeborn subjects
of good quality should be given as it were in prey to
others. And for that the sequel of this matter appertaineth
to many, the exasperation also rising thereof must
needs be very general.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The violent manner
of searches.</note>
Now if we should stand upon the particular
enumeration of the calamities which fall upon Catholics by
private persons, and especially Puritans put in authority
over them, the many insolences and molestations which
are offered in the searches which are used in most odious
manner, and so have been ever since this first Parliament,
it would much afflict the hearts of the pious readers. And
it is to be thought that many particulars thereof are not
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
known to His Majesty, though all exercised and executed
in his name and under his authority. What a thing is it
for a Catholic gentleman to have his house suddenly beset
on all sides with a number of men in arms both horse and
foot, and not only his house and gardens and such inclosed
places all beset, but all highways laid for some miles near
unto him, that none shall pass but they shall be examined!
Then are these searchers ofttimes so rude and barbarous
that, if the doors be not opened in the instant when they
would enter, they break open the doors with all violence, as
if they were to sack a town of enemies won by the sword,
which is a strange proceeding, and proper only to our
persecuted state at this time, for it is not used elsewhere,
but with us so common that no man can have assurance of
one hour's quiet or safety within the walls of his own
habitation, which yet in just and peaceable commonwealths
should be his fortress and castle. Whereupon it
seemed so strange to the Scottish gentlemen that came
into England with His Majesty, that divers of them said&mdash;<q>If
we in Scotland should be thus used, or that any should
enter our house by force and against our will, we should
presently have killed them.</q> If they said this for this
forcible entry only, what may be said for their manner of
proceeding being entered? Which I will therefore set down
more in particular, that by this the reader may judge of
our usage in other things.
</p>

<p>
The searchers being thus entered, it hath been usual
with pursuivants to run up the stairs and into the chambers
with their drawn swords, enough to drive the weaker sort of
women and children out of their wits. Then they begin to
break off locks and open all the doors of the house
presently, that they may at one time search in many
places. Then if they find no Priest nor suspected persons
for Priests in any of the chambers or closets, they go
presently to search for secret places, and this they do
most cunningly and strictly, sounding the floors and walls
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
to see if they can find any hollow places. They do also
measure the walls of the house and go round about the
house on the outside to see if one part do answer to
another, in hope to find some void part left hollow,
wherein a man may be hid. Sometimes, if the walls be
not made of stone, but of wainscot or other weak matter,
they will thrust through it with their swords in many
places, hoping that in some place or other they may light
upon a Priest, and this they do also in the roof of the
house, upon suspicion there may be some conveyance,
though they cannot find the entry into it, as, indeed, the
doors of the secret places are commonly made with such
art as it is hard to find them or espy them, otherwise it
were not possible to keep Priests so long as some Catholics
do and have done. But the searchers, if they find any
likely cause of suspicion, not contented with that dangerous
manner of trial with their swords (in which cases
some Priests have escaped very hardly of being wounded
or slain), they then break down the walls wholly and
enter themselves to search with candles and torches in all
such dark places and in housetops, where sometimes
nothing but mice or birds have come of many years.
This we hope will be a means to prevent the diligent
search of God's judgments wherein he saith&mdash;<q>Scrutabor
Jerusalem in lucernis.</q><note place='foot'><q>I will search Jerusalem with lamps</q> (Soph. i. 12).</note> But if this be permitted
by God's judgment to be done to His servants in this life,
what shall be done to the doers of this in the next? <q>Si
in viridi ligno hæc faciunt, in arido quid fiet?</q><note place='foot'><q>For if in the green wood they do these things, what shall be done in
the dry?</q> (St. Luke xxiii. 31).</note>
<q>Incipit judicium (saith St. Peter) a domo Dei. Si autem
primum a nobis, quis finis eorum qui non credunt Evangelio?</q><note place='foot'><q>For the time is that judgment should begin at the house of God. And
if first at us, what shall be the end of them that believe not the Gospel of
God?</q> (1 St. Peter iv. 17).</note>
But to return unto our narration.
</p>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
When the searchers find not any Priest for all this
cruel diligence they have used, they will not yet give
over, but supposing there is or may be some so secretly
hidden that yet he is there for all that they have
done, then they appoint a watch about the house and
every part thereof of fifty or sixty men, and sometimes
more, and these with guns and bills, &amp;c.; and this
they keep for many days together (intending to starve
him out), sometimes for six, yea, ten and twelve days'
continuance. Sometimes, also, they place watchmen in
the chambers of the house within, both to keep that no
Catholic shall stir to relieve the Priest (though commonly
they make them sure for that by locking them up all in
one part of the house together, which they mean least to
search as being least suspected); and besides that they
may hearken if any little stirring be behind a wall, yea, but
the breathing or coughing of a Priest (which was the means
indeed by which Fr. Cornelius before mentioned was found
out and apprehended), to which end also they do sometimes
cunningly speak aloud, one to another, that they will
begone away because they can find nothing, and seem to
make a noise as though they did depart; then will they go
softly into the chambers a little after and seem to be of the
house, and knock softly at every wall, willing the good
man to come forth, for now the searchers are gone, thanks
be to God. This subtlety is usual to these men&mdash;<q>Sed
deficient scrutantes scrutinio et exaltabitur Dominus et
sagittæ parvulorum sicut plagæ eorum.</q><note place='foot'><q>They have searched after iniquities: they have failed in their search
... and God shall be exalted: the arrows of children are their wounds</q>
(Psalm lxiii. 7, 8).</note> And
truly sometimes the protection of God is wonderful in
these cases, that men do escape their hands, when by
human means one would think it were wholly impossible,
of which I have known many examples.
</p>

<p>
But the searchers, in the meantime, when they can
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
find no Priest, whom they chiefly desire to take in any
man's house, because then his lands and goods and life also
are all forfeited:&mdash;but if that will not be, then they rifle
every little corner for church stuff, for copes and vestments,
chalices, pixes, and such. For these they break open chests
and trunks; then to cabinets and little boxes for letters,
hoping to find some spiritual advice in them (though not
to follow it, God knows), but thereby to infer that they
are Priests' letters with whom they have acquaintance; or
if they find any Agnus Deis, or beads or medals that they
can prove are hallowed, then also all the lands and goods
of the parties are seized and themselves condemned to
perpetual prison, which was the case of Mr. Tregian, a
worthy gentleman of great estate. Many examples of all
these particulars might be alleged, but it were too long for
the reader, and not safe for the parties of whom the stories
must be told, especially if they be truly set down in such
barbarous manner as they were performed, which is
sometimes so uncivil that they will search the very beds
where man and wife do lie at their first breaking into the
house, when they come in the night, as in London, it
is most commonly, yea, sometimes into the beds where
women lie in childbed. Yea, they will not spare grave
ancient matrons and women of great place. One ancient
lady, lying in Holborn, in London, was
in this sort so rudely handled by them that she fell sick
upon it and lived not long after&mdash;a grave lady, and a
woman of great virtue.
</p>

<p>
Briefly, their insolences are so many and so outrageous,
and thereby the miseries and afflictions of Catholics were
so much increased and multiplied, that it seemed to many
very intolerable to be long endured. The only hope might
be that which at those times Priests did labour to persuade,
and divers of the graver Catholics were yet content to
believe, might be possible (as in darkness, the least
glimpse of light, though but far off, doth bring some
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
comfort, in hope it may come nearer), and that was the
memory of His Majesty's faithful promises, which, being
given on the word of a Prince, they thought could not be
violated, unless they should hear himself to speak the
contrary. This only hope did yet live in some, though
many apparent proofs to the contrary did continually
weaken it. But this little spark of light also was soon
after clean put out, no doubt by the industry and
malicitious procurement of the Puritans, whose custom
it is to incense the King against Catholics by some false
information, and thereby to draw from His Majesty
certain bitter speeches and invectives against Catholics,
which then themselves are forward to publish, thereby to
put Catholics the more in despair, and by despair into some
cause giving of further afflictions, like him that will beat a
child to make him cry, and then beat him because he crieth.
</p>

<p>
But first, that which did seem to extinguish wholly all
hopes of help from His Majesty was, that whereas, in the
beginning of the year 1605, it pleased him to call a
conference between the Protestant Bishops and the chief
of the Puritan side, in which conference or disputation the
King, as head of the Church of England in ecclesiastical
matters (which the Puritans acknowledge not), sat as chief
moderator or judge in all things&mdash;though I say it was his
pleasure to give unto the Puritans a day of hearing, yea,
three days together full audience of all that they could say
or allege for themselves and for their novelties and newly
coined heretical inventions, yet would he not once admit
the Catholics to be heard or any for them, notwithstanding
their prescription and long-continued possession in their
religion, and that they hold no other faith than that which
was warranted from erring by Christ Himself, received
from the seat of the Apostle St. Peter, commended for
universal by St. Paul, planted in our own country with
miracles, watered with the blood of acknowledged martyrs,
strengthened with the authority of all the ancient Doctors,
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
practised and delivered unto us by known and granted
Saints, honoured and professed by all his ancestors,
approved, commended, and commanded by all the ancient
Parliaments and laws of the realm; notwithstanding all
these and many other titles unto truth of doctrine which
we can allege, prove, and convince to be on our side, and
only to stand for us, yet we were put to silence, our mouth
was shut, yea, and stopped also (at the instance of the
Puritans), least we should be heard to cry that might not
be suffered to speak. Which, that you may the better see
to be most true, you shall understand that when His
Majesty, having heard the Puritans at full, and knowing
them to be a restless and imperious company if they
should be approved in their opinions, and dangerous to
his person and State (as he had often trial in Scotland) if
they should be permitted to grow to greater strength&mdash;for
this cause he and his Council thought it needful to define
all matters in controversy between the Protestants and
them wholly in every point against the Puritans, but then,
being willing to give them satisfaction in some things,
<q>Et nesciens quomodo aliter placeret eis, nisi in capitibus
nostris,</q><note place='foot'><q>For how can he otherwise appease his master, but with our heads?</q>
(1 Kings xxix. 4).</note> he first, in the whole conference, uttered
divers things that were very afflictive to Catholics, proceeding
from the mouth of their King, whom they had so
much honoured and in whom they had hoped. Then,
drawing towards the end of the said conference, he urged
the Bishops very much to a diligent inquiry and punishment
of the said Catholics (which needed not, I wis, in
respect of their known malice and vigilancy against
them). At which time His Majesty said he observed
and discovered three degrees of recusant Papists, as he
called them; one that refused to go to the communion
but not to the service or sermons, the other refused to go
to communion or service but not to sermons, the third
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
refused all three, in which distinction His Majesty did
comprehend those also whom we count schismatics and
well-wishers only, we esteeming, indeed, none for Catholics,
nor admitting any unto the Sacraments of the Church, but
those which refuse all communion with heretics in any of
the three.
</p>

<p>
But all these kinds His Majesty said were carefully to
be sought out and prosecuted, &amp;c. And when the Chancellor
there present, and ready to devise new afflictions unto
Catholics for the satisfaction of the Puritans and his credit
with the King, proposed for a greater and sharper galling
of them, that ordinary processes <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de excommunicato capiendo</foreign>
might be exercised upon them, saying that no other punishment
would vex them so much; for that by force of this
they should be barred from making testaments; they should
also be holden as outlaws and used accordingly; no man
needed to pay them any debts, nor any tenant their rents,
unless they list; and what injury soever they then receive,
they can have no remedy. This huge and universal affliction
the Chancellor had no scruple to entreat for us, and that he
might have license to give out commandment for the same,
and that all under officers might be punished that any
way failed thereof. Whereunto, saith the book wherein all
this conference is printed at large, His Majesty yielded
and gave consent. By which one consent you may imagine
how great a sea of molestations he did let forth upon the
said Catholics, and no less also by his consent to the 104
Canons at that time set down and agreed on, all which
were devised and planted by the said Bishops to beat and
batter the said Catholics withal. By this it is easy to
judge what cause all Catholics had by this time of extreme
diffidence of help from thence where it was most expected.
And that Catholics might know the better what to trust
unto concerning all their former hopes conceived or
promises received, the contrary was afterwards more
plainly made known unto them by divers persons in
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
authority, and that in serious and public manner, of
which I will only allege two examples, by which you may
guess at the rest; both which are published in print by
themselves in a book intituled <hi rend='italic'>The late Commotion in
Herefordshire</hi>, &amp;c., printed by J. Charlton and F. Burton.
One is that upon the 5th of August, in the year 1605,
the then named Bishop of London, now of
Canterbury, preaching at Paul's Cross, did utter a certain
protestation of His Majesty, made, as he saith,
before God and His Angels, that he was so constant and
firm for the maintenance of the English religion which now
he professed, as that he would not only spend his own
dearest blood in defence thereof together with all his kingdoms
if he had ten times so many as he hath; but moreover
desired of God, that if He saw any of his children would be
of other mind after him, He should take them away in his
lifetime, that he might see them brought to their grave
before him, to the end that their shame might be buried in
his lifetime.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The L. Chancellor,
his speech in the
Star Chamber.</note>
All which words of the King's related by the Bishop,
the author of the book doth avow were spoken by His
Majesty principally against Papists and their hope of
toleration or mitigation of their pressures, which he saith
to be a vain hope, &amp;c. The other example is the Lord
Chancellor his speech in the Star Chamber
some days before this, to wit, Thursday, the
20th of June in the same year, where, speaking unto the
Judges before they went their circuit, and to the Justices of
Peace, gentlemen and others, that were to return into their
countries after the Term ended and relate what they had
heard in London, he delivered in vehement sort a large and
sharp speech as from His Majesty's sense, words and commandment
against all sorts of Catholics, but especially
Priests, Jesuits, and recusants, and such as did acknowledge
the authority of the Pope of Rome, ordaining and charging
in His Majesty's name that all Judges in their circuits, all
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
Justices of Peace in their districts, all gentlemen in their
countries, and other people in the places where they should
abide, should inquire after them, pursue and seek them out,
that they might be punished, adding thereunto a certain
new rigour of punishment not before in use, but designed
now by His Majesty, as he said, to wit, that every Justice
of Peace, though himself were no Papist, yet if he were
thought to favour or tolerate Papists, or if his wife,
children, or servants were Papists, they should lose their
offices and be removed out of the Commission of
Peace, as unfit members to hold that place (which could
be for no other reason, but lest by some means or other
some little favour might happen to some Catholic by
their means, as a town that is very strictly besieged is
commonly barred from all relief both by sea and land).
Finally, he concluded with that in effect which the Bishop
spake at Paul's Cross concerning the vain hopes of
Catholics for any toleration or alleviation of their afflictions;
hereunto adding a speech (saith the book) of His
Majesty's concerning the folly of Papists, how they were
besotted, yea and more than bewitched to suppose any
such matter of toleration, wondering whereupon they
should build their false hopes, adding also that His
Majesty had vowed unto his Privy Council, that if he
did know that any of his children after him would go
back from this, he would lay his curse upon him.
</p>

<p>
These and the like speeches do our chiefest enemies,
the Puritans, use to draw from His Majesty, and afterwards
cause to be divulged also to no small prejudice of
the mutual love and goodwill, reverence, and respect,
which ought to be between the Prince and his subjects,
as between the father and his children: they being not
ignorant what effect such speeches do work, and that any
injury is more easily borne at a Prince's hand than contumely
against a multitude.
</p>

<p>
Whereupon they have further procured that ordinarily
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
when His Majesty cometh to dinner or supper, some one
shall be ready to give occasion of hard speeches against
the Catholics; and this is commonly the office of Mr.
Mountague, dean of his chapel, who was in profession
so earnest a Puritan that he would not wear the cap or
surplice (which Protestants admit) before the King's
coming for any persuasion; but since, in respect of the
deanery in that place of credit, he is content to dispense
with his conscience, though his mother, the Lady
Mountague, have given him her curse for his labour,
and saith she will not acknowledge him for her son in
respect of that dissimulation, as she calleth it. But
howsoever it be, his partners, the Puritans, make evil use
of his place, being such as may so often and so easily have
the King's ear, whereunto he is so ready, that, besides
other tricks, he hath this now and then, to bring some
Catholic book in his bosom, with the leaf turned into
some place or other where the author doth speak any
thing that may offend His Majesty, as, namely, of the
Bishop of Rome, especially when it toucheth his spiritual
authority over Princes; which His Majesty reading or
hearing read, and growing thereby into heat of disputation,
refutation, or reprehension, uttereth oftentimes words
which these men and their adherents do no less odiously
urge and divulge afterward, than craftily and maliciously
they procured before. As for example, that His Majesty
doth hold all Catholics that esteem of the Pope's authority
for traitors, and especially recusants that will not in respect
of their religion communicate with Protestants in their
service and sacraments, and finally that none can hold
all points of Catholic religion and be a true subject; with
divers other such speeches which gall and grieve the
hearts of Catholics above measure, all which are afterward
avouched by the standers-by in His Majesty's name,
by citing his authority for it. Whereof we could allege
too many examples, which we pretermit, for that it is
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
likely that His Majesty had not so grievous meaning
therein against his Catholic subjects, as the words do
sound or as by such seditious people is wont to be inferred
or urged, the sooner to put men into despair.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sir Edward Coke, now L. Chief,
in his 5th part of Reports.</note>
And yet we must confess that one circumstance hath
greatly increased the fear of all Catholics touching His
Majesty's meaning in this most deeply touching point,
which is, that his Attorney-General
(a man not lightly esteemed in his profession of the
common laws of our country) having made a book
whereby he would fain prove Catholic recusants to be
traitors, wresting and enforcing the common laws of the
realm to that same purpose; and presenting the said
book unto the King, it was not only gratefully received by
His Majesty, but highly commended also, and the doctrine
allowed, so far forth that the King affirmed the same by
oath and said, <q>By my sall, I do hold them all for
traitors indeed, and it is here very sufficiently and truly
proved.</q> And this was spoken publicly at His Majesty's
table, divers noblemen standing by, and some that were
not ill-affected to Catholics and knew their minds and
deserts unto His Majesty to be much contrary to this
construction.
</p>

<p>
This therefore being known to Catholics, it is easy
to be seen how first their hopes were turned into fears
and then their fears into full knowledge that all the
contrary to that they hoped was intended and prepared
for them. It being well known that this book was made
by the Attorney according to the direction of the
Council, to prepare the mind of His Majesty and the
other Peers of the realm against the ensuing Parliament
then to make laws against Catholics of such nature and
force as are fit and usual to be made against traitors; and
therefore cunningly they caused it first to be delivered to
His Majesty in public place, presuming that when the
King had approved the book, and showed himself of the
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
same opinion, no subject durst seem to think the contrary,
and therefore that none would be slack in giving assent
to any laws intended, how cruel soever. And this is
thought to have been a great cause of hastening the
impatience and temerity of those gentlemen who (as we
find now by their examinations) about these times conspired
to work their designment against the Parliament,
as thinking by like, that sith they were condemned for
traitors and to be used for such at the Parliament, they
had no way to defend their life but by seeking to hinder
the Parliament, and that also, by so doing, they should
be no more esteemed traitors than they were already,
nor their brethren neither, being all esteemed and condemned
beforehand for such. So that if they failed of
their purpose, they should not increase any evils to
themselves or others; and if their desires took effect, then
they should free both (which otherwise they thought
impossible), besides the delivery of infinite souls from
schism and heresy, from sin and damnation, which they
all protested at their death was their principal intention.
</p>

<p>
But howsoever their intention was for the cause of
their enterprise (which I leave to the judgment of God),
sure we are the thing intended was most unfit, and a
thing that I suppose hath brought more grief to the hearts
of Catholics generally in England than ever anything did
in all this time of their sufferings. But by this we may
see how rash and temerarious attempts extremity doth
sometimes suggest, and that the counsel was wise which
Abner gave to Joab, when he did prosecute his
victory with too great violence. <q>An ignoras,</q> saith he,
<q>quod periculosa sit desperatio?</q><note place='foot'><q>Knowest thou not that it is dangerous to drive people to despair?</q>
(2 Kings ii. 28).</note> As if he should say,
Art thou so skilful a captain and art ignorant that despair
doth often drive those that fly to turn head again with
new and redoubled forces? especially when the despair
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
of escaping by flight is so great that they see rather
increase of hope than of danger by fighting, which hope
of theirs men will then seek to strengthen with their
uttermost forces; whereof the event is often such as it
turns the danger on the contrary side, of which kind
many examples are daily seen. And that not only in
men, that by natural reason are led to choose the less
danger, but in the poorest and most fearful creatures also
that be, which of their own natures are so timorous that
they fly at the very sight of man, as we see in many silly
beasts both in house and fields; yet when they are so
pursued and pressed, as they are put in desperation of
their life, they turn again and leap in a man's face itself.
So that this course of giving too much cause of despair
is holden dangerous by all wise men, and as such is
carefully foreseen and prevented in most commonwealths.
But our rulers had been so long acquainted with our
patience, and made trial thereof by so many and so
urging cruelties, that they thought themselves sure the
Catholics would never attempt anything in their own
defence that might offend the State, howsoever they were
used. And surely so it had continued still, as it hath
long done, if this enterprise had been in their power to
prevent. But it was carried with that secrecy and with
such manner of proceeding as it was not possible for
others to hinder it, nor seemed probable that any did
intend it; as now it will appear more plainly in the
chapters following.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III.
How Upon These And The Like Motives Divers
Gentlemen Did Conspire And Conclude Upon
Some Violent Remedy.</head>

<p>
By that which hath been set down in the former chapter,
every prudent man will easily conceive what was like to be
the sense and feeling of all Catholics in this so great
increase of their long-endured afflictions, in this utter
despair of any help from His Majesty (in whose promised
clemency all their hopes were placed), and in a certain
expectation of other most cruel and newly-invented laws
to be further imposed upon them at the next Parliament
as against traitors not worthy to live in a commonwealth,
and as such already published in books framed and printed
by authority, and so censured and pronounced by the King
himself. In what other state could they be but a general
and most afflicting desolation, and as the Prophet Esay
saith, <q>Omne caput languidum et omne cor
mœrens</q><note place='foot'><q>The whole head is sick and the whole heart is sad</q> (Isaias i. 5).</note> from the highest to the lowest.
</p>

<p>
But the cogitations of men, as they were all much
afflicted in such an inundation of evils upon them without
hope of ease or end, so yet no doubt they were very different
according to the divers states of minds in plenty or
penury of grace, and partly also according to their different
natures and dispositions, some more able and apt than others
to bear injuries with patience. We know right well, and all
England will witness with us, that the greatest part by much
did follow the example and exhortation of the Religious
and Priests that were their guides, moving them and leading
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
them by their own practice to make their refuge unto God
in so great extremities, <q>Qui nunquam deserit
sperantes in se;</q><note place='foot'><q>Who hath not forsaken them that hope in Him</q> (Judith xiii. 17).</note> <q>Nec patietur nos tentari supra
id quod possumus, sed faciet cum tentatione proventum ut
possimus sustinere.</q><note place='foot'><q>Who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able,
but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to bear it</q>
(1 Cor. x. 13).</note> <q>Immo modicum passos ipse
proficiet, confirmabit, solidabitque.</q><note place='foot'><q>Who after you have suffered a little, will Himself perfect you and
confirm you and establish you</q> (1 St. Peter v. 10).</note> This we found to be
believed practically by most, and followed as faithfully,
preparing themselves by more often frequentation of the
Sacraments, by more fervent prayer, and by perfect resignation
of their will to God, against the cloud that was like
to cover them, and the shower that might be expected
would pour down upon them after the Parliament, unto
which all the chief Puritans of the land were called, and
only they or their friends selected out of every shire to
be the framers of the laws, which thereby we might easily
know were chiefly intended and prepared against us. But
in so great a multitude all are not so perfect, some few
fainted in courage, and, as St. Cyprian noteth of his times,
did offer themselves unto the persecutors before they felt
the chief force of the blow that was to be expected.
</p>

<p>
Others again (as since it hath appeared) were much
different from these, and ran headlong into a contrary
error. For being resolved never to yield or forsake their
faith, they had not patience and longanimity to expect
the Providence of God, <q>qui attingit a fine usque
ad finem fortiter et disponit omnia suaviter.</q><note place='foot'><q>She reacheth from end to end mightily and ordereth all things sweetly</q>
(Wisd. viii. 1).</note> They
would not endure to see their brethren so trodden upon
by every Puritan, so made a prey to every needy follower
of the Court or servant to a Councillor, so presented and
pursued by every churchwarden and minister, so hauled
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
to every sessions when the Justices list to meet, so wronged
on every side by the process of excommunication or outlawry,
and forced to seek for their own by law, and then
also to be denied law, because they were Papists; finally
both themselves and all others to be denounced traitors,
and designed to the slaughter. These things they would
not endure now to begin afresh after so long endurance,
and therefore began amongst themselves to consult what
remedy they might apply to all these evils (and few
greater than these by the daily destruction of innumerable
souls, as they alleged at their death), so that it seems they
did not so much respect what the remedy were, or how
it might be procured, as that it might be sure and
speedy, to wit, to take effect before the end of the Parliament
from whence they seemed to expect their greatest
harm.
</p>

<p>
And this I do guess to have been the likeliest
motive, to make that stratagem of the Parliament House
to come into their head, unless perhaps they did think
it was impossible for them to prevail any other way.
Now peace being concluded by other Princes, they could
not expect any sufficient aid from them. And they saw
that other Princes were willing with the peace in regard
of their own affairs (which might be cause sufficient),
although there the peace of Catholics was not included; yea
presently upon the concluding of that, they saw and felt that
the persecution began afresh and in far worse manner than
before (as in the precedent chapters hath been related),
yet they found that their case would not be understood in
many Princes' Courts, but rather the Ambassadors and
other instruments employed by their persecutors believed,
than their case credited when it was laid down by witnesses
of unstained integrity. And seeing for these causes no
hope of help from others, they knew well that of themselves
by open rising in field they were not able to resist
and repel the force of the whole State, both because all
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Catholics would not join in those courses, and because
both Protestants and Puritans would then join together
against them; therefore this public course being not probable
to take effect, it is like they fell to search out what
private way might be within their power and yet might
be effectual. And then, as it seems by their confessions
(made after to the Council), Mr. Catesby proposed that
fatal and final course of overthrowing the Parliament
House, alleging for his reason that which before I gathered
to be his mind out of his own words: that so, said he,
we may deliver our country from the servitude she is in,
and at one instant deliver us from all our bonds, and
although we can have no foreign help, yet so may we
plant again the Catholic religion in our country. Thus
you may see how good desires may be followed by unfit
means, and how much a man may be deceived when he
doth follow but his own ways, how good or great soever
the motives be or the wished effect of that he goeth
about, for <q>non est faciendum malum ut inde eveniat
bonum.</q><note place='foot'><q>We must not do evil that good may come.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
And when one of his companions, called Mr. Winter, proposed
that the matter was so great and imported so many
that it would be well considered of, Mr. Catesby answered,
<q>The nature of the disease was such that it required
so sharp a remedy, and that the Parliament was the place
where all the laws had been made against Catholics, and
therefore the fittest for the makers of those laws there
to receive their punishment, especially there being then
chosen all the Puritans of the realm, of purpose to make
much more cruel laws than before; so that at one blow
they should cut off all the greatest enemies of God's
Church, and the greatest persecutors both of their souls
and bodies, which they could not do by any other possible
means; and not doing that, they would never prevail nor
save the whole country from destruction of their souls,
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
nor their brethren and themselves from slaughter of their
bodies.</q> Thus he. This, therefore, seeming probable and
pious to their deceived judgments, they fell upon that
conclusion, that they would prepare for it as soon as they
could, but in such secret manner that no living creature
for no cause should understand of their designments but
themselves that then consulted, who were but five in
number, and they would take an oath of secrecy upon
a Primer to that effect. Only some months after, when they
found some more help was needful for them, they concluded
that three of the five, whereof Mr. Catesby and
another of the chiefest to be two, might impart it to some
other chosen person to draw him into the action. So great
care they had, that it might not be so much as suspected
by other Catholics, and especially they meant to keep
it from their ghostly Fathers and all kind of Religious
men or Priests, knowing well they should never have their
assent to an action of that nature. And besides, for that
they had no doubt at that time or any scruple in the
matter for the causes before alleged, gathered out of
Mr. Catesby his words, though afterwards when the matter
depended much longer than they expected, upon some
occasion or other that belike was offered, they began to
doubt of one circumstance, and then sought resolution,
but in such cunning and close manner, as shall afterwards
appear in the process of the story. And thirdly, for that
they feared their ghostly Fathers would assuredly draw
them out of that course if they should have understanding
of it, which to be a principal cause of their keeping the
matter so secret from them, may appear by the speeches
which Sir Everard Digby used afterwards at the time
of his arraignment.
</p>

<p>
The five that concluded first upon this preposterous
Plot of Powder were these, Mr. Robert Catesby, Mr.
Thomas Percy, Mr. Thomas Winter, Mr. John Wright,
and Mr. Guy Fawks, as appeareth by the confession
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
of the said Mr. Thomas Winter: ¶<note place='foot'>Where this kind of mark ¶ is found, my meaning is to have a new line
begin. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi></note> out of whose examinations
with the others that were made in the time of
their imprisonment, I must gather and set down all that
is to be said or collected of their purposes and proceedings
in this heady enterprise. For that as I have said, they
kept it so wholly secret from all men, that until their
flight and apprehension it was not known to any that
such a matter was in hand, and then there could none
have access unto them to learn the particulars. But we
must be contented with that which some of those that
lived to be examined, did therein deliver. Only for that
some of their servants that were up in arms with them
in the country did afterwards escape, somewhat might
be learned by them of their carriage in their last extremities,
and some such words as they then uttered, whereby their
mind in the whole matter is something the more opened,
and all as I have heard then I will faithfully relate.
</p>

<p>
But first that these first conspirators may be the better
known, together with the matter and manner of their conspiracy,
it shall be good to let you see in particular what
the persons were.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Catesby (who as it seems by many
circumstances was the first inventor and the chiefest
furtherer of the Plot) was a gentleman of an ancient and
great family in England, whose chief estate and dwelling
was in Warwickshire, though his ancestors had much living
in other shires also. Some of his ancestors had borne great
sway in England. But commonly the greatest men are not
the best. Some others have been of great esteem for virtue,
as namely one knight of his house (I take it some four or
five descents ago) was commonly known and called in all
the country, <q>good Sir William Catesby,</q> of whom this
memorable thing is recorded; that when he had lived long
in the fear of God and works of charity, one time as he
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
was walking in the fields, his good Angel appeared and
showed him the anatomy of a dead man and willed him
to prepare him, for he should die by such a time. The
good knight presently accepting of the message willingly,
recommended himself with a fervent prayer unto our
Blessed Lady in that place and then went home and
settled all his business both towards God and the world,
and died at his time appointed. This story is painted
upon a wall in the church of Ashby, where that knight
and other of Mr. Catesby's ancestors lie buried. Myself
have both seen the pictures and read the prayer in that
place.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Catesby his estate in his father's time was great,
above 3,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a year, which now were worth much more; but
Sir William Catesby, his father, being a Catholic and often in
prison for his faith, suffered many losses and much impaired
his estate. This son of his when he came to the living was
very wild, and as he kept company with the best noblemen
of the land, so he spent much above his rate and so wasted
also good part of his living. Some four or five years before
Queen Elizabeth died, he was reclaimed from his wild
courses and became a Catholic, unto which he had always
been inclined in opinion, though not in practice. But after
this time he left his swearing and excess of play and
apparel and all wild company and began to use daily
practices of religion instead of them, insomuch that his
former companions did marvel to see him so changed; for
he concealed his being a Catholic a long time. After that,
about three years before the Queen's death, when the Earl
of Essex did intend and attempt by force to put down
some of those that ruled the State and meant (as it is
thought) to have brought in His Majesty that now is into
the realm at that time, and to that end combined many
noblemen and gentlemen together in the enterprise, then
was Mr. Catesby a principal man in the action, having first
received a faithful promise from the Earl of toleration
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
at least for all Catholics: yea and to that end he procured
some other Catholics to join also.
</p>

<p>
In that business, though it was weakly performed by
those that had the chief carriage, especially that Earl of
Essex, yet did Mr. Catesby show such valour and fought so
long and stoutly, as divers afterwards of those swordsmen
did exceedingly esteem him and follow him in regard thereof,
and only commended Sir Christopher Blunt and him, both
which were often compared together, as well for their
performance, as for the hurts they received; though Mr.
Catesby kept his very secret in prison, being in hope to
escape with a ransom, as he did, paying 2,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, but it cost
him 3,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> before he got out. All which I therefore relate,
as a chief means of his getting aid and followers in the other
enterprise following, in which although he and his complices
did us as great a wrong as might be, and took themselves
a most wrong course in their deceived zeal; yet I will not
wrong them with false reports in anything, nor wrong the
reader so much, as not to let him plainly know what kind
of men they were, and to that end do relate both their good
and their evil.
</p>

<p>
When Mr. Catesby was cured of his hurts and had
paid his ransom and procured his liberty, he was so much
esteemed and respected in all companies of such as are
counted there swordsmen or men of action, that few were
in the opinions of most men preferred before him, and
he increased much his acquaintance and friends. Upon
which occasion he then began to labour to win many to the
Catholic faith, which he performed, and brought many to
be Catholics of the better sort, and was a continual means
of helping others to often frequentation of the Sacraments,
to which end he kept and maintained Priests in several places.
And for himself he duly received the Blessed Sacrament
every Sunday and Festival-day, and grew to such a composition
of manners and carriage, to such a care in his
speech (that it might never be hurtful to others, but taking
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
all occasions of doing good), to such a zealous course of life,
both for the cause in general and every particular person
whom he could help in God's service, as that he grew to
be very much respected by most of the better and
graver sort of Catholics, and of Priests, and Religious also,
whom he did much satisfy in the care of his conscience;
so that it might plainly appear he had the fear of God
joined with an earnest desire to serve Him. And so no
marvel though many Priests did know him and were often
in his company. He was moreover very wise and of great
judgment, though his utterance not so good. Besides he was
so liberal and apt to help all sorts, as it got him much love.
He was of person above two yards high and, though slender,
yet as well proportioned to his height as any man one
should see. His age (I take it) at his death was about
thirty-five, or thereabouts. And to do him right, if he had
not fallen into this foul action and followed his own judgment
in it (to the hurt and scandal of many), asking no
advice but of his own reasons deceived and blinded under
the shadow of zeal; if, I say, it had not been for this, he
had truly been a man worthy to be highly esteemed and
prized in any commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Thomas Percy was of the name and kindred
of one of the ancientest and greatest Earls in England,
though I think he was not very near in blood, although
they called him cousin. His estate was not great, depending
most upon the same Earl that now is of the house
of Percies, under whom he had the keeping of a castle
and the receiving of his rents, with the overlooking and
command of his tenants in those parts. For the most part
of his youth he had been very wild more than ordinary,
and much given to fighting, so much that it was noted in
him and in Mr. John Wright (whose sister he afterwards
married) that if they had heard of any man in the country
to be esteemed more valiant and resolute than others,
one or the other of them would surely have picked some
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
quarrel against him and fought with him to have made
trial of his valour. This Mr. Percy was for most of his time
affected to Catholics and a friend unto them, and did
labour and was the means to get some out of prison;
but himself far from professing the same, or following
their counsel or example, until within five or six years
before his death, and I think about the time of my Lord
of Essex his enterprise he became Catholic; for he was also
one in the action and a very forward man, hoping that
some ease at least would have come to Catholics by the
means. After that he was much more reclaimed, and
grew in time, by keeping Catholics' company, and often
frequentation of the Sacraments, to leave all his old
customs, and to live a very staid and sober life, and for
a year or two before his death kept a Priest continually
in the country to do good unto his family and neighbours,
though himself came thither but at times, living
for the most part in London, where he was made one of
the Gentlemen Pensioners in Ordinary, and so continued
till his death. He had a great wit and a very good
delivery of his mind, and so was able to speak as well as
most in the things wherein he had experience. He was
tall, and of a very comely face and fashion; of age near
fifty, as I take it, for his head and beard was much changed
white.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Thomas Winter was a younger brother
of the house of Huddington, in the county of Worcester,
whose eldest brother and another younger than himself were
also brought after into the action by his means. This
gentleman had spent his youth well as it seemed by the
parts he had, for he was a reasonable good scholar, and
able to talk in many matters of learning, but especially in
philosophy or histories very well and judicially. He could
speak both Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. He had
been a soldier both in Flanders, France, and, I think,
against the Turk, and could discourse exceeding well of
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
those matters. And was of such a wit, and so fine carriage,
that he was of so pleasing conversation, desired much
of the better sort, but an inseparable friend to Mr. Robert
Catesby. He was of mean stature, but strong and comely
and very valiant, about thirty-three years old or somewhat
more. His means were not great, but he lived in good
sort, and with the best. He was very devout and zealous
in his faith, and careful to come often to the Sacraments,
and of very grave and discreet carriage, offensive to no
man, and fit for any employment. I wish therefore he had
been employed in some better business.
</p>

<p>
Mr. John Wright was a gentleman of Yorkshire,
not born to any great fortune, but lived always in place
and company of the better sort. In his youth and for the
most of his time very wild and disposed to fighting and trial
of his manhood, as I touched before. He became Catholic
about the time of my Lord of Essex his attempt, in which
he was; and after that time kept much with Mr. Catesby
and some other gentlemen of his friends and acquaintance.
He grew to be staid and of good sober carriage after he
was Catholic, and kept house in Lincolnshire, where he
had Priests come often, both for his spiritual comfort and
their own in corporal helps. He was about forty years old,
a strong and a stout man, and of a very good wit, though
slow of speech; much loved by Mr. Catesby for his valour
and secrecy in carriage of any business, which, I suppose,
was the cause why he was one of the first acquainted with
this unfortunate enterprise.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Guido Faulks spent most of his time
in the wars of Flanders, which is the cause that he was less
known here in England, but those that have known him do
affirm that as he did bear office in the camp under the
English coronell on the Catholic side, so he was a man every
way deserving it whilst he stayed there, both for devotion
more than is ordinarily found in soldiers, and especially for
his skill in martial affairs and great valour, for which he
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
was there much esteemed. And that was the cause, as it
may be thought, why Mr. Catesby and the rest of the
conspirators cast their eyes upon him before others, when
they desired one out of Flanders to be their assistant.
</p>

<p>
But would to God these gentlemen had used their talents
better and employed them to the service of God and their
country, for which they were given, and not to the offence
of the one and destruction of the other, as we find now
to our great increase of grief amidst the rest of our many
calamities and heavy burthen of persecution, of which
the memory of this matter is not the least. Undoubtedly
they were men of able parts to perform much in God's
service, and so it is like they would have continued as
they had begun if they would have feared sufficiently their
own fancies, and followed the grave example and advice
of those from whom they sought for help in all other
matters that concerned their soul. And yet at length they
began to doubt in some points of this also, as shall appear
in the chapter following.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV.
How After They Had Begun Their Enterprise, They
Fell Into Some Scruple, And Went About To
Satisfy Their Conscience By Asking Questions
Afar Off, Of Learned Men, Without Opening
The Case.</head>

<p>
It appeareth by the confession which Mr. Thomas Winter
made unto the Lords of the Council, being published in
print by order from the said Council, that these gentlemen
having concluded upon this course of violent remedy
(because they resolved to undertake it as their last refuge
and remedy of all the evils they sought to prevent), Mr.
Catesby, who first proposed this fatal blow to be given
to the Parliament House, did also first propose unto them
the last trial which he thought likely to prevail for redress
of those evils by quiet means; and to use his own words,
there related by Mr. Winter, <q>First (said he to Mr.
Thomas Winter) because we will leave no peaceable and
quiet way untried, you shall go over and inform the Constable
(who was then upon his coming in) of the state
of the Catholics here in England, entreating him to solicit
His Majesty at his coming hither, that the Penal Laws
may be recalled, and we admitted into the rank of his
other subjects.</q> Mr. Winter went over and delivered his
message unto the Constable as in the name of all the
Catholics of England, whose answer was, that he had
strict command from His Majesty of Spain to do all good
offices for the Catholics; and for his own part, he thought
himself bound in conscience so to do, and that no good
occasion should be omitted. Thus much the Constable
promised at that time, and no doubt performed it both
wisely and charitably in what he could. But it is an
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
easy matter to satisfy with hopes of future favours, when
he that receives the promises shall not be present to see
the performance.
</p>

<p>
So soon as the peace was concluded, and the Constable
[of Spain] departed, the stream of persecution began
to run more violently than before. Searches were more
frequent, the seizure of goods more ordinary and violent,
the payment of 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month with the arrearages also
were enacted, and (which terrified most) the Puritans,
who were the chief men selected and summoned for the
Parliament, were so full of their designments against
Catholics, that they could not choose but [cast out great
threats]<note place='foot'><q>Eructare verbum malum.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Orig.</hi></note> against them in every place where they came;
some affirming they would now set up their rest and
have their will of Catholics; some that they would leave
no Catholics in England after a while; others that they
hoped to see them all hanged ere it were long. Yea, I know
a town myself whither some Puritans came to seize some
goods of Catholics long before the Parliament, where the
party whose goods were taken, complaining of the rigour in
the manner of proceeding, the officers answered, <q>They
hoped to see all the Catholics' throats cut shortly, therefore
this was nothing.</q> Things therefore standing in these
terms with Catholics, these gentlemen resolved to expect no
further trials, but, as I said, concluded upon their intended
stratagem, bound each other by oath to the highest degree
of secrecy, and so it seems they went about their business,
never fearing any fault in the thing itself, nor fall that
might come to Catholics by their error; and thus it continued
for a good space with them.
</p>

<p>
They hired a house by the water side (as may appear in
Mr. Winter's confession) where they might first land their
powder when they had bought it, and from whence they
might easily transport it by boat also unto the place appointed,
which was a house close by the Parliament House,
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
hired by Mr. Thomas Percy, as a fit residence for himself
near the Court, being Pensioner, and to wait daily in his
quarters. And Mr. Faulks went as his man to keep the house.
In this house, to prevent occasions of often going out,
because they would not seem to be many in the house, they
bought baked meats and made provision at once for a long
time. They began to work underground at such times
as they could least be heard, and wrought the mine until
they came to the wall of the Parliament House, which
finding to be hard stone, they were long about a little
progress, and were to be more wary than before in respect
of the noise. Whilst they were thus together, and proceeding
daily as they might, they had leisure, saith Mr.
Winter, to fashion all their business, and to discourse of
all things that were to be done in the matter, whereby it
may seem their first resolution of the thing itself was
sudden, and such as young heads and forward minds do
often bring forth, without due consideration of circumstances
and likely events, which would not have been if
they had asked counsel in the cause; but rather, if the
matter had been of that quality that it had been fit to
have proceeded in it (as this was most unfit of all others),
then would all the circumstance of importance have been
foreseen beforehand, and all likely events forecast, and
according to them the resolution left off or undertaken.
But these gentlemen, as it seems then, with that leisure
and opportunity of being so much in private together,
began to fashion their business, after they had begun the
enterprise. Then they began to think how they should
get into their hands the next heir, whom they might
set up and strengthen against the meaner sort of Puritans
that would be left; so that his authority being used in
his nonage, the Catholic religion might be erected, and
he so brought up, as that he would at his full years be
a patron of the same. And Mr. Percy undertook that
charge, being one that might best be seen in the Court,
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
in regard of his place. Then they discoursed what foreign
Princes they should acquaint with the business, in respect
of their help after against the heretics, if they did stand
out long. And they resolved to acquaint none; first,
because they could not oblige them by oath to secrecy, so
as they might be sufficiently assured thereof, which they
esteemed the most necessary point of all others, and the
strength of the whole business; secondly, for that it seemed
they were doubtful the matter would be misliked by other
Princes, as indeed they had cause to think it, not likely
only, but certain; and so no doubt they would have found
it, if it had been imparted to any, especially if the least
notice had come unto His Holiness, who had ever showed a
special care of our King, and had great hope that in time
he would do well both for himself and his country. Then
also they began to think what Lords they should save out
of the Parliament. And first they resolved they would save
as many as they could. Then they descended more into
particulars, to consider whom they might draw out of the
danger, without danger of discovering unto them the cause
why, or so that they might have the least suspicion of
the matter intended.
</p>

<p>
And here, belike, finding it would be very hard to
save so many as they desired, and yet withal to save
the secrecy of their enterprise (in which consisted the
safety of themselves and of the cause), here it is very
likely they began to have that scruple in which afterwards
they sought to satisfy their conscience, but not
in right and plain matter as they should, by explaining
the case of which they demanded, but afar off, as a
thing by chance coming into their mind, and concerning
rather a point of warlike affairs in general, than any
particular intention of theirs at that time to be put in
practice. For whilst they were in the middle of their
discourses (saith Mr. Winter), understanding that the Parliament
should be anew adjourned, they left off their work
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
for that time, and went to keep Christmas in several places,
which was always their custom, to avoid suspicion. Then
the chiefest of them took the present commodity offered
by meeting with learned Priests that holy time, and
meant to inform themselves of such doubts as were risen
concerning the lawfulness of the business they had in hand.
And, having a great opinion both of the learning and virtue
of the Fathers of the Society, Mr. Catesby desired to get,
by cunning means, the judgment of their Superior, so as
he should never perceive to what end the question were
asked. Therefore coming to Father Garnett, after much
ordinary talk, and some time passed over after his arrival,
one time he took occasion (upon some speech proposed
about the wars in the Low Countries or such like) to ask
how far it might be lawful for the party that hath the
just quarrel to proceed in sacking or destroying a town
of the enemy's or fortress when it is holden against them
by strong hands. The Father answered that in a just war
it was lawful for those that had right to wage battle
against the enemies of their commonwealth, to authorize
their captains or soldiers, as their officers, to annoy or
destroy any town that is unjustly holden against them, and
that such is the common doctrine of all Divines: in respect
that every commonwealth must by the Law of Nature be
sufficient for itself, and therefore as well able to repel
injuries as to provide necessaries; and that, as a private
person may <foreign rend='italic'>vim vi repellere</foreign>, so may the commonwealth
do the like with so much more right as the whole is of
more importance than a part; which, if it were not true,
it should follow that Nature had provided better for
beasts than for men, furnishing them with natural weapons
as well to offend as to defend themselves, which we see also
they have a natural instinct to use, when the offence of
the invader is necessary for their own defence. And therefore
that it is not fit to think that God, Who by natural
reason, doth provide in a more universal and more noble
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
manner for men than by natural instinct for beasts, hath
left any particular person, and much less a commonwealth,
without sufficient means to defend and conserve itself;
and therefore not without power to provide and use likely
means to repel present injuries, and to repress known and
hurtful enemies. And that, in all these, the head of the
commonwealth may judge what is expedient and needful
for the body thereof. Unto which Mr. Catesby answering
that all this seemed to be plain in common reason, and
the same also practised by all well-governed commonwealths
that ever have been, were they never so pious
or devout. But, said he, some put the greatest difficulty
in the sackage of towns and overthrowing or drowning
up of forts, which, in the Low Countries, and in all wars
is endeavoured, when the fort cannot otherwise be
surprised, and the same of great importance to be taken.
How then those who have right to make the war may
justify that destruction of the town or fort, wherein there
be many innocents and young children, and some perhaps
unchristened, which must needs perish withal? Unto
this the Father answered, that indeed therein was the
greatest difficulty; and that it was a thing could never
be lawful in itself, to kill an innocent, for that the reason
ceaseth in them for which the pain of death may be
inflicted by authority, seeing the cause why a malefactor
and enemy to the commonwealth may be put to death
is in respect of the common good, which is to be preferred
before his private (for otherwise, considering the thing
only in itself, it were not lawful to put any man to death);
and so because the malefactor doth <foreign rend='italic'>in re gravi</foreign> hinder
the common good, therefore by the authority of the
magistrate that impediment may be removed. But now,
as for the innocent and good, their life is a help and
furtherance to the common good, and therefore in no sort
it can be lawful to kill or destroy an innocent. But, said
Mr. Catesby, that is done ordinarily in the destruction
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
of these forts I spake of. It is true, said the Father, it
is there permitted, because it cannot be avoided; but
is done as <foreign rend='italic'>per accidens</foreign>, and not as a thing intended by
or for itself, and so it is not unlawful. As if we were shot
into the arm with a poisoned bullet, so that we could not
escape with life unless we cut off our arm; then <foreign rend='italic'>per accidens</foreign>
we cut off our hand and fingers also which were sound,
and yet being, at that time of danger, inseparably joined
to the arm, lawful to be cut off, which it were not lawful
otherwise to do without mortal sin. And such was the
case of the town of Gabaa, and the other towns of the
tribe of Benjamin, wherein many were destroyed that
had not offended. With which Mr. Catesby seeming
fully satisfied, brake presently into other talk, the Father
at that time little imagining whereat he aimed, though
afterwards, when the matter was known, he told some
friends what had passed between by Mr. Catesby and
him about this matter, and that he little suspected then
he would so have applied the general doctrine of Divines
to the practice of a private and so perilous a case, without
expressing all particulars, which course may give occasion
of great errors, as we see it did in this.
</p>

<p>
Now Mr. Catesby having found as much as he thought
was needful for his purpose, related the same unto the rest
of the conspirators, and all were animated in their proceedings
without any further scruple for a long time, but
applied all by their own divinity unto their own case,
persuading themselves belike, that they had all the conditions
of a lawful war with the Puritans and Protestant
parties. First, a just cause, in defence of their goods, lives,
and liberty, both of themselves and their brethren, and
especially for the delivery and safety of so many thousand
souls inthralled by sin and heresy; secondly, they thought
they found in themselves a right intention to suppress
evil and erect and strengthen that which was good and
needful; thirdly, about authority to commence the same,
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
I suppose they had most difficulty, and do not see how
they could satisfy their own reason (much less the rules
that are required in schools) in that behalf, seeing they
did know so well, and had been so often told by the
said Father Garnett and others of their spiritual guides,
that His Holiness had given strict charge there should
be nothing attempted against His Majesty [and the State],
but that all Catholics should seek in patience to possess
their souls, and thereby, and not by force, to plead for
favour. I know not therefore from what ground they
could imagine themselves to have authority, although in
a far less matter. For it is not likely that they should think
of the opinion of some that hold <q>quod defensio manualis
cum sit de Jure Naturali non potest auferri per Superiorem
vel contrarium præcipi.</q><note place='foot'><q>That, as the right of hand to hand defence is of the Natural Law, the
Superior cannot take it away, or enjoin the contrary.</q></note> And besides, that is to be
understood <foreign rend='italic'>in ipso conflictu</foreign>, and not <foreign rend='italic'>longe ante</foreign>, as in this
case of the Parliament.
</p>

<p>
But it is an easy matter for an earnest desire to
draw a man's opinion after it, and so their great and
unadvised zeal to remedy the wrongs done to Catholics
both in soul and body, might perhaps make them think
that this opportunity of the Parliament being omitted,
they should never again have power or opportunity to
defend the Catholic party. And that there was not sufficient
access to inform Superiors of the case of Catholics,
neither that their extremities were believed, and that if
they were truly known, they neither would nor could
be tolerated when remedy might be applied, in which
they thought themselves as it were the officers and hands
of the commonwealth, in whose hands and power it was
then to perform it as they thought, but would not be
so if they should ask counsel or leave of others, because
so great a secret could not be kept in the mouths of
many, and those not in like manner or measure affected
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
to the business. Thus we may see how oftentimes it
happens that a greedy affection and desire of the prey doth
not let the bird consider or see the danger of the net which
hangeth between the prey and it. And so as it is in too
earnest pursuit of riches, that <q>qui volunt divites
fieri incidunt in tentationem et in laqueum diaboli,</q><note place='foot'><q>For they that will become rich, fall into temptation, and into the snare
of the devil</q> (1 Tim. vi. 9).</note>
so in this case, their vehement desire of their prefixed end,
did make them oversee a number of inconveniences and
perils both of soul and body, that did hang upon this
lamentable enterprise, which they did afterwards find,
and as I hope repented: and others for their fault have
felt more at leisure since this matter happened.
</p>

<p>
But we that be innocent in the case, and were no ways
accessary to the cause giving, must not repine at God's
judgments, if He suffer us to be beaten for the error by
others committed: Et si in vincula conjiciamur quasi
mala operantes et ante reges et præsides ducamur quasi
non existentes amici Cæsaris,<note place='foot'><q>Though we be cast into bonds as evil doers, and be brought before
Kings and rulers as not being Cæsar's friends.</q></note> yet we must be comforted
in the testimony of our own conscience, that we do hate
all treason against our Prince as much as those that punish
us for traitors, and would no ways have joined in this if we
had known it, but our earnest endeavours against it should
have given sufficient testimony of a contrary mind in us, as
may and will appear in the chapter following was done by
Father Garnett when he began to fear they had something
in hand, although he could never guess or suspect so
strange a practice as they were then in plotting or rather
in perfecting to be performed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V.
How Father Garnett Beginning To Suspect Somewhat
By Certain Generalities He Understood
Of The Gentlemen, Wrote Divers Letters To
Rome For Prevention Of Rebellion.</head>

<p>
When Mr. Catesby had thus satisfied his particular
doubts out of this general doctrine, both he and his
company went forward in their former purposes and after
Christmas met again and began to labour afresh in the
mine, to work through the wall of the Parliament House
which they found to be difficult and long in doing. Whereupon
by mutual consent they took in another assistant who
was Mr. Christopher Wright, younger
brother to John Wright before described in the third
chapter, by whom also this other may be known without
new description. For though he were not like him in
face, as being fatter and a lighter coloured hair and taller of
person, yet was he very like to the other in conditions and
qualities, and both esteemed and tried to be as stout a man
as England had and withal a zealous Catholic and trusty
and secret in any business as could be wished: in respect
whereof they esteemed him very fit to be of their company
and so caused him to take the oath of secrecy and he
received the Blessed Sacrament thereupon (as they had also
done) and so admitted him. Not long after they admitted
also another, which was Mr. Robert Winter, the eldest
brother to Thomas Winter before spoken of.
</p>

<p>
This Robert Winter was a gentleman of
good estate in Worcestershire, about one thousand marks
a year, and had matched with the daughter of Mr. John
Talbot, an ancient Catholic and one of the greatest men
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
in the whole shire for blood, for living, and for power.
Mr. Robert Winter was also an earnest Catholic, though
not as yet generally known to be so. He was a wise
man and of grave and sober carriage and very stout,
as all of that name have been esteemed. This gentleman
then with like ceremonies and obligation to secrecy
was joined to their number and made them up seven;
who all laboured hard in the mine to get through the
foundation of the house, which was a hard stone wall
of three yards thick. And so they continued working
until near Easter, at which time finding that a cellar under
the side of their house (which was until that time in the
possession of others) was then to be let for rent, Mr. Percy
presently took the same, as if it were to lay in fuel for his
house and they found it so commodious for their purpose,
that they left off their other laborious work in the mine;
and in the cellar placed all their powder and covered the
same with billets, in such sort as it could not be suspected:
intending to store it better with powder and other necessaries
nearer to the time of the Parliament which then
was adjourned.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime Father Garnett understanding by
some friends that Mr. Catesby was much missing from
the places where he was wont continually to resort for
spiritual helps; and hearing also, that he and other
gentlemen of his forward humour did keep much together
and had many secret meetings, he began to suspect
they had something in hand that might tend to some
commotion and that they did labour to get adherents
for some attempt to be performed in forcible manner.
Whereupon he wrote presently to his Superiors at Rome,
that by their means there might be procured from His
Holiness a prohibition to be sent unto Catholics from
attempting anything by way of force, and of this kind he
wrote divers letters which myself have seen since that time.
And having had good commodity to see the copies of them
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
lately in a place where they are safely kept, I will set down
his own words written in several letters, that the reader
may see his wise and quiet proceeding and the mild spirit
of the man, much different from the calumnious reports his
enemies have given of him concerning this action and
directly contrary to the turbulent spirit of those that have
been professed teachers of heresy both in those and other
countries.
</p>

<p>
And first he wrote one letter to his Superiors in the year
1604, dated on the 29 of August, whilst the peace was yet
in treaty and some hope yet living in Catholics that their
peace would also be included, in which he hath these words
(showing how difficult a matter it was for Catholics to be
heard in their own cause even by some of those that were
to plead for them). <q>Some,</q> saith he, <q>are so jealous of their
peace that whosoever dealt earnestly with them to further
religion, they sticked not to say that they were seditious
and statesmen. <q>Nunquid pax est perniciosa religioni?</q><note place='foot'><q>Can peace be hurtful to religion?</q></note>
said one of them. But no wise men misliked the peace and
we hope for good of religion, which Catholics do patiently
expect.</q> These are his words: and truly if all that had to
do in the matter had dealt as effectually for us in that kind
as the Constable did in the small time of his stay there,
perhaps things might have gone better with us than they
did; but as he received promises which were not performed
after his departure; so others were with like policy made
believe that things did not go so hard with us as indeed
we felt them: although it be true that the hardest of all
began after the peace was fully concluded. In the same
letter of Father Garnett's one may see also what difficulty
he had on the other side with some Catholics to keep them
quiet if some mitigation should not be obtained for them
after so long expectance, wherein he meant belike Mr.
Catesby and some such whom he most feared, about which
he wrote these words following in cypher: <q>If the affair of
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
toleration go not well, Catholics will no more be quiet.
What shall we do? Jesuits cannot hinder it. Let Pope
forbid all Catholics to stir.</q> These are his words, which
sufficiently declare both his desires and endeavours to
further peace and to hinder the contrary.
</p>

<p>
About a month after he wrote another letter in answer
of one he had received from his Superiors not long before
(as I perceive by the party that hath the keeping of these
letters), wherein they did require to be informed whether
himself or any of the Society in England were against the
peace, or did favour or further unquiet proceedings in any
respect; for that such an information had been sent to Padua
out of England, but not known by whom, unto which he
answered as followeth: <q>That which was written to Padua,
that the King is much moved against Catholics through the
fervour of some Jesuits, is known to be false here by all,
as well enemies as friends. For they were the setters on
of the suit for peace, and the Agent always used their
counsel, and without their credit and friends he had never
gone so forward. Besides, an Earl of great account commended
publicly the Jesuits in the Parliament House, as
persons wise, learned, and of sincere conscience, and great
setters forwards of peace. In Watson's business it is well
known how many had been entangled, and what danger
would have followed if they had not hindered. For
although they cannot hinder what every tumultuous head
intendeth, yet can they carry with them to peaceable
courses the best and most Catholics. Finally, our enemies
see our courses and stick not to say that we flatter the
Council, whose good opinion we have gotten. Thus
humbly saluting yourself and all our friends, I cease this
21 of September.</q> Thus the good Father, in whose
words we may see how, with truth and sincere dealing,
he was able, and had need to defend himself and his
Company from virulent surmises and false informations
on both sides; some informing they did bend to the one
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
extremity, and some thinking they did lean unto the other;
but virtue is in the mean, in which path both he and
his did walk.
</p>

<p>
And as for that matter of Watson's, thus much I
can say upon my knowledge, that when the Plot was
revealed unto Father Gerard to have his counsel and
furtherance therein, he first refused absolutely to meddle
in the matter, and wished the other party to desist himself
and to dissuade others from it, as a thing absolutely unlawful
and many ways hurtful. Then presently, for better
prevention thereof, he sent to London of purpose, both
to inform his own Superior, Father Garnett, and the Archpriest,
Mr. Blackwell, wishing they would presently forbid
all their acquaintance from entering into the cause, and
to stay it what they could; by which course he thought
he had done sufficient to hinder the proceeding of the
matter, not knowing then that any others were interested
therein but those few Catholics from whom and of whom
he had heard it. But afterwards, understanding again
that the intention did go on, and that they were to be
at London at Midsummer to effect their intent (which
was to apprehend the King's person as he should be
hunting in a park); and seeing that Midsummer was then
at hand, and the time so short, that he feared much no
warning to the parties themselves would be sufficient to
stay them, he then, to be more sure of the safety of His
Majesty's person, made known the whole intention unto
one of His Majesty's servants, a Scottish gentleman and
a Catholic, and as such well known unto His Majesty,
who presently made haste unto the Court to open the
matter unto the King himself; but found it was known
the day before he came, and so spake nothing of it, being
not then needful, nor he willing without cause to be
acknowen of his acquaintance with Father Gerard: for which
cause also I do here suppress his name; but if occasion
were, I doubt not but he would be willing to bear witness
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
with what care and fidelity the said Father Gerard did
seek to prevent the danger to His Majesty. All which
having heard from Father Gerard himself upon his protestation
to be true in every point as I have here related,
I do the rather set it down, because he was one of
the three afterwards most wrongfully accused of this other
much greater and more pernicious conspiracy, whereof he
had not so much as the least knowledge, as will afterwards
more plainly appear.
</p>

<p>
But to return to the letters of Father Garnett. When
once he began to suspect that the gentlemen aforesaid
had something in their heads, and perceived by divers
words and signs, that they were the more strange with
the Society; and as it were offended that the Society were
still so earnest to persuade all men to expect the Providence
of God, and the help that might be procured by
the mediation of other Princes, wherein also they assured
all Catholics that His Holiness would effectually procure
them to do their best. These gentlemen were impatient
to hear of any longer stay upon unlikely hopes, and therein
esteemed the Society hinderers of their good, as may
appear by a letter of Father Garnett, written in the 8 of
May, 1605, wherein he hath these words set down all in
cypher: <q>All are desperate, divers Catholics are offended
with Jesuits; they say that Jesuits do impugn and hinder
all forcible enterprises. I dare not inform myself of their
affairs, because of the prohibition of Father General for
meddling in such affairs.</q> Then out of cypher followeth:
<q>And so I cannot give you exact account; this I know
by mere chance.</q> Thus much Father Garnett, whereby
may appear both what commandment he had received
from his Superiors and how carefully he performed it, even
to the offence of these forward-minded Catholics, who were
then well forward in their cruel enterprise. For this was
after they had left the mine, and hired the cellar, as I
said in the last chapter, as more commodious for their
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
purpose. But of all that Father Garnett had not then
the least imagination, only so much as he gathered by
generalities, he informed his Superiors that they might
hinder. Whereupon, having soon after received answer
of these from Father Persons, with strict charge in the
name of His Holiness, with Father General's letters also
to the same effect, that he and his should continue, by
all means possible, to hinder any insurrection or undutiful
proceedings against His Majesty or the State. Unto
those letters Father Garnett made this answer following,
dated the 24 of July, the same year 1605.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Magnifice Domine,</q>
</p>

<p>
Accepimus Dominationis vestræ litteras, quas, eâ quâ
par est reverentiâ erga suam Sanctitatem et vestram Paternitatem
amplectimur. Et quidem pro meâ parte quater
hactenus tumultum impedivi. Nec dubium est quin publicos
omnes armorum apparatus prohibere possimus; cum certum
sit multos Catholicos absque nostro consensu nihil ejusmodi
(nisi urgente necessitate) attentare velle. Duo tamen sunt
quæ nos valde solicitos tenent. Primum ne alii fortassis
in unâ aliquâ Provinciâ ad arma convolent, unde alios
ipsa necessitas ad similia studia compellat. Sunt enim
non pauci qui nudâ suæ Sanctitatis jussione cohiberi non
possunt. Ausi sunt enim, vivo Papâ Clemente, interrogare,
num posset Papa illos prohibere, quominus vitam suam
defendant? Dicunt insuper, suorum secretorum Presbyterum
nullum fore conscium, nominatim vero de nobis
conqueruntur etiam amici nonnulli nos illorum molitionibus
obicem ponere. Atque ut hos aliquo modo leniremus
et saltem tempus lucraremur, ut dilatione aliquâ adhiberi
possint congrua remedia, hortati sumus ut communi consilio
aliquem ad Sanctissimum mitterent, quod factum est,
eumque ad Illustrissimum Nuncium in Flandriam direxi,
ut ab ipso suæ Sanctitati commendetur; scriptis etiam
litteris, quibus eorum sententiam exposui, et rationes pro
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
utrâque parte. Hæ litteræ fuse scriptæ ac plenius fuere,
tutissime enim transferentur. Atque hæc de primo periculo.
Alterum est aliquanto deterius, quia periculum est
ne privatim aliqua proditio aut vis Regi offeratur, et hoc
pacto omnes Catholici ad arma compellantur. Quare,
meo quidem judicio duo necessaria sunt; primum ut sua
Sanctitas præscribat quid quoquo in casu agendum sit;
deinde ut sub censuris omnem armorum vim Catholicis
prohibeat, idque Brevi publice edito, cujus occasio obtendi
potest nuper excitatus in Walliâ tumultus qui demum in
nihilum recidit. Restat ut (cum in pejus omnia quotidie
prolabantur) oremus S. Sanctitatem his tantis periculis
ut brevi necessarium aliquod remedium adhibeat, cujus
sicut et Rdæ. Ptis. vræ benedictionem imploramus.<note place='foot'><q>We have received your letters and accept them with all the reverence due
to His Holiness and your Paternity. For my part four times up to the present
I have hindered disturbances. Nor is there any doubt that we can prevent all
public taking up of arms, as it is certain that many Catholics would never
attempt anything of this sort without our consent, except under the pressure of
a great necessity. But two things make us very anxious. The first is lest
some in some one province should fly to arms, and that then very necessity
should compel others to like courses. For there are not a few who will not be
kept back by a mere prohibition of His Holiness. There were some who dared
to ask, when Pope Clement was alive, whether the Pope could prohibit their
defending their lives. They further say that no Priest shall know their secrets;
and of us by name even some friends complain that we put an obstacle in the
way of their plans. Now to soften these in some way, and at least to gain
time, that by delay some fitting remedy may be applied, we have advised them
that by common consent they should send some one to the Holy Father, which
they have done, and I have sent him into Flanders to the Nuncio, that he may
commend him to His Holiness, and I have sent by him letters explaining their
opinions and the reasons on both sides. These letters are written at some
length, as they will be carried very safely. And this for the first danger.
The other is somewhat worse, for the danger is lest secretly some treason or
violence be shown to the King, and so all Catholics may be compelled to take
arms. Wherefore, in my judgment, two things are necessary: first, that His
Holiness should prescribe what in any case is to be done; and then, that he
should forbid any force of arms to the Catholics under censures, and by Brief
publicly promulgated, an occasion for which can be taken from the disturbance
lately raised in Wales, which has at length come to nothing. It remains that
as all things are daily becoming worse, we should beseech His Holiness soon
to give a necessary remedy for these great dangers, and we ask his blessing
and that of your Paternity.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Londini, 24 Julii, 1605.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Magcæ. Dnis. Væ. Servus</q></l>
<l><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Henricus G.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
By these we may see that Father Garnett having now
great suspicion that these gentlemen had something in
hand against the State, or perhaps perceiving by some
general signs there was some such matter, he sought
presently to apply the surest remedy from His Holiness.
And true it is, as will appear after in Father Garnett's
arraignment, that Mr. Catesby offered sometimes to tell him
that they would not endure to be so long so much abused,
but would take some course to right themselves, sith others
would not respect them or could not relieve them; unto
which general speeches Father Garnett would give no ear,
nor durst not enter to inquire further of the matter, in
respect of a prohibition from his Superiors, which he touched
in the former letters. But yet upon this general knowledge,
you see how earnestly he wrote for an authentical instrument
of prohibition from such authority as he knew they
would not resist, although perhaps his own words, in a
matter of so great weight, would not suffice for all, though
for the most and best it would, as before he also touched.
</p>

<p>
And it seemed soon after, as he thought that he had
done some good with those gentlemen also, whom he
feared most, or else that they had promised him to lay
aside all thought of those matters, until they had answer
from the gentleman whose sending, as you see, he had
proposed to defer their hot desires until a cooling card
might be sent from Rome, in answer of this his letter. For
soon after, he wrote other letters of the 28 of August,
wherein (having first declared how both his houses were
discovered unto the Council, and he thereby utterly unfurnished
of a safe place, and thereupon resolved to spend
most of the summer in travel to visit a holy well of
St. Winifred, which is a great pilgrimage in England, and
to do what good he could at friends' houses by the way,
both going and coming, until a fit house could be provided
for him, wherein he might settle for the winter); this
declared, he wrote as followeth: <q>And for anything we
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
can see, Catholics are quiet, and likely to continue their
old patience, and to trust to the King or his son for to
remedy all in time. The increase of Catholics is great,
and I hope in this journey (which I undertake to-morrow,
both for health and want of a house) I shall have occasion
of much good. I leave for substitute,</q> &amp;c. And so he
proceedeth to show whom he left to dispatch his London
business in his absence. But where Father Garnett said
in this letter that for ought he could see Catholics were
quiet, his meaning was, no doubt, quiet from any attempts,
as he supposed. For as for other quietness, or repose from
persecution, you shall see what quiet there was by another
letter of his written in October following, towards the
end of his journey; which, being the true relation of the
present state of things to be seen in such a man's letter,
I think best to set it down verbatim: <q>My very loving Sir,
we are to go within few days nearer London, yet are we
unprovided of a house, nor can find any convenient for
any long time. But we must be fain to borrow some private
house for a time, and live more privately until this storm
be overblown. For most strict inquiries are practised,
wherein if my hostess be not quite undone, she speedeth
better than many of her neighbours. The courses taken
are more severe than in Queen Elizabeth's time. Every six
weeks is a several court; juries appointed to indict, present,
find the goods of Catholics, prize them, yea in many places
to drive away whatsoever they find <q>contra ordinem juris,</q>
and put the owners, if perhaps Protestants, to prove that
they be theirs, and not of recusants with whom they deal.
The Commissioners, in all countries, are the most earnest
and base Puritans, whom otherwise the King discountenanceth.
The prisoners at Wisbich are almost famished;
they are very close, and can have no help from abroad;
but the King allowing a mark a week for each one, the
keeper maketh his gains, and giveth them meat but three
days a week. If any recusant buy his goods again, they
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
inquire diligently if the money be his own, otherwise they
would have that too. In fine, if these courses hold, every
man must be fain to redeem once in six months the very
bed he lieth on. And hereof (that is of twice redeeming)
besides other precedents, I find one in this lodging of
&mdash;&mdash;, where now I am.</q> (In his letter it is described,
but here not fit to set down.) <q>The judges now openly
protest that the King now will have blood, and hath taken
blood in Yorkshire; that the King hath hitherto stroked
Papists, but now will strike. And this is without any least
desert of Catholics. The execution of two in the North
is certain, and whereas it was done upon cold blood, that
is, with so great stay after their condemnation, it argueth
a deliberate resolution of what we may expect. So that
there is no hope that [Pope] Paul [V.] can do anything;
and whatsover men give out there, of easy proceedings
with Catholics, is mere fabulous. And yet I am assured,
notwithstanding, that the best sort of Catholics will bear
all their losses with patience. But how these tyrannical
proceedings of such base officers may drive particular men
to desperate attempts, that I cannot answer for. The
King's wisdom will foresee. In my journey,</q> &amp;c. So he
proceedeth to relate some particular occurrents that
happened in his journey not needful here to be set down,
yet towards the end of the letter he setteth down this: <q>I
have a letter from Field in Ireland who telleth me that
of late there was a very severe proclamation against all
Ecclesiastical persons, and a general command for going
to the church, with a solemn protestation that the King
never promised nor meant to give toleration.</q> All these
are Father Garnett's words truly and sincerely set down
as they lie in his letter written by his own hand, dated
the 4th of October, 1605,<note place='foot'>This date is an interlineation. Father Gerard has not noticed that the
passage <q>I have a letter from Field,</q> &amp;c., is taken from the PS. of this letter,
and that the PS. bears date 21 Octobris. For this omission he has been
severely blamed by Mr. Tierney.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> which I am the more glad
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
I lit on, because it doth agree so just with my former
relation of the state of England touching persecution of
Catholics before the time of this late conspiracy; whereby
some may see, by the plain words of so grave a witness as
Father Garnett was, how much they are deceived, when they
think that the persecution was caused by the conspiracy,
and not, <foreign rend='italic'>e contra</foreign>, the conspiracy intended and attempted
by those gentlemen out of impatience to bear so great
abuses, and that from so base and cruel enemies as the
Puritans are, who were everywhere made princes over
Catholics, though otherwise not thought worthy to be
esteemed or countenanced.
</p>

<p>
All these, I say, be Father Garnett his letters, whereof I
have seen the copies and have truly set down his own words
as they are in the same (as I assure the reader upon my
conscience), and the letters themselves, as I understand for
certain, are as yet to be seen in Rome under his own hand,
if occasion require. And by all these it is most apparent
that Father Garnett was as careful as a man could be, to
observe the strict commandment he had received both from
His Holiness and from Father General and Father Persons
his Superiors not to assent to any tumult, but to use all
means he could to keep Catholics in quiet and in their
former long combined patience, which he performed of his
part with all sorts, and therein prevailed with the most and
the best, as himself noteth. And how effectual his persuasions
were, may also appear in that, when the gentlemen
were up in arms, no Catholic of account would come to assist
them, no, not those that were hard by the place; and men
of great power, much greater than those that were risen:
yea and some of them near of kindred, some nearly allied
unto them; and yet they would neither go, nor send them
any assistance; yea they shut their gates against them,
when others came to demand it. Such was their resolution
to obey the order they had received and to keep themselves
quiet, according to the commandment they had from
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
His Holiness, by the means of Father Garnett made known
unto them. And whereas, Father Garnett did fear at the
first, and afterwards find, that he could not rule some others
so well, them he persuaded to defer at the least all such
practices, until they had sent to know His Holiness' will:
he, in the mean time, labouring, as you have seen, to have
an effectual prohibition by a public instrument from the
same authority. So that, it is most apparent, he was not
only innocent from any furtherance or approbation of the
treason itself; but also, an earnest hinderer of all kind
of undutiful courses and violent attempts: and therein
a most diligent and religious observer of his Superiors' will
and commandment. Yet all this would not serve to work
sufficient patience, or any longer expectance in the minds of
these foresaid gentlemen, who, although they bare Father
Garnett in hand that they would expect answer, this, as it
seems, was but a show of expectance in them, and continued
only until they saw the Parliament was almost at hand, and
that it was too late for him to send further notice to his
Superiors, and receive their answer. And they, in the
mean time, proceeded, as afterwards Father Garnett also
chanced to know, very much against his will, as will appear
in that which followeth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI.
How In The Mean Space, The Conspirators Proceeded
In Their Purpose, And Drew In More
Complices, And What They Were.</head>

<p>
Whilst the great persecution before recited did reign so
much, and brought with it so many and so great afflictions
upon all sorts of Catholics, as before you have read, and
whilst Father Garnett did verily persuade himself that
notwithstanding all those great difficulties, all was and
would be borne with patience, until further order could be
taken, and the same patient toleration publicly commanded
which he had privately counselled; these foresaid gentlemen
who had commenced a course before that time which
Father Garnett did little dream of, although they did bear
him in hand whom they saw resolute for quiet courses, that
they would expect until order came from authority, after
their messenger had been heard, whom they had sent to
explain their griefs according to his counsel, yet they,
persuading themselves (as they afterwards affirmed to some
that were with them, when they were in arms in the country,
but were not taken with them) that if contrary order to
their designments should come from higher authority (as
they feared in likelihood it would, and therefore were loth
to expect so long) that the same was only upon mistaking
of their case or upon some hope perhaps His Holiness
might have that things would be better with Catholics
after a time, and that favour would be procured by fair
means; and this hope grounded upon promises from those
that had deceived many with the like and never kept
any yet that they made in that kind. They therefore,
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
thinking themselves to have had so long trial hereof,
would not be staid, as it seems, from their present purpose
by future expectations, but proceeded in what way they
had begun, and provided still more powder to such a
quantity as made up in all thirty-six barrels, some
bigger and some less; all which they placed so in the
cellar under the Parliament House, as must needs have
overthrown the same and some other buildings also that
had been near unto it, if it had been set on fire as was
intended; especially having placed thereon many billets of
wood to cover the same powder and some bars of iron also
of purpose: all which being blown up with the powder,
would have made sure to tear and rend the Parliament
House in pieces.
</p>

<p>
Thus having disposed all things in the cellar as they
would have them, they absented themselves much from
thence; because they would give no cause of note over
that place more than others, whereof they were ever very
careful. And so they had good cause, being men as
likely to be noted by the State for men of action and performance,
as any in the realm; and then, being withal
known to be resolute Catholics, their often meetings or
haunting much to one place, especially near the Court,
would not have been free from suspect. For the same
cause also, during all the time they wrought in the mine or
cellar, they would have but small company, and were but
seven acquainted with the matter, all which I named before.
Only one man of meaner condition they admitted there into
the secret, to help them in making provision of their powder,
and that was one Bates, a servant of Mr. Robert
Catesby's, whom he had great opinion of for his long tried
fidelity towards him, which the poor fellow continued even
until he saw his master dead; and then, it is like, his heart
was dead withal, for he showed some fear after, when he
was taken, which gave others occasion to work upon his
weakness and to give some beginning of colour towards the
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
accusation of divers that were not guilty in the matter, as
shall afterwards appear. But these foresaid gentlemen
having left the cellar, as they desired to find it, were then
to seek for further helps wherewith to effect their designments
when that act should be performed. For then their
purpose was (saith Mr. Winter in his printed confession) to
seize upon the person of the young Prince, if he were not in
the Parliament House, which they much desired. But if
he were, then upon the young Duke Charles, who then
should be the next heir, and him they would erect, and with
him and by his authority, the Catholic religion. If that
did also fail them, then had they a resolution to take the
Lady Elizabeth, who was in the keeping of the Lord Harrington
in Warwickshire; and so by one means or other, they
would be certain to settle in the crown one of the true heirs
unto the same. But to perform this part of their exploit
required more hands and help than as yet they had at
command. Wherefore they bethought themselves what help
they might adjoin unto them in that great secret, without
likely danger and yet with the assistance which they
wanted, which partly required some more men of strength
both in mind and body; but chiefly for supply of money,
which if they had in readiness, and that placed in those
countries where they meant to gather to a head, and where,
for the most part, all sorts are either Catholic or affected to
Catholics, they thought then they could want neither men
nor any needful provision.
</p>

<p>
To this effect they first acquainted Mr.
Ambrose Rookewood with the business, a gentleman of good
worth in the county of Suffolk and of a very ancient family
and himself the heir of the eldest house. This gentleman
was brought up in Catholic religion from his infancy and
was ever very devout. His parents also were very virtuous
and suffered much persecution for their Faith, both in
payment of money and loss of their goods and many other
molestations; yet was their house a continual receptacle
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
for Priests, and a place wherein many other Catholics did
often find great spiritual comfort, the house being a very
fair great house and his living very sufficient. But that
which moved them specially to make choice of Mr. Rookewood
was, I suppose, not so much to have his help by his
living as by his person, and some provision of horses,
of which he had divers of the best: but for himself, he was
known to be of great virtue and no less valour and very
secret. He was also of very good parts otherwise as for wit
and learning, having spent of his youth in study. He was
at this time, as I take it, not past twenty-six or twenty-seven
years old and had married a gentlewoman of a great
family, a virtuous Catholic also, by whom he had divers
young children. Yet it seemed all those did little move
him nor any respect to his living or fortune, though he had
enjoyed them but a little time; whereby I do gather, they
made a great account of this business, in respect whereof, it
seems, they made account of nothing.
</p>

<p>
Next unto him was a Warwickshire
gentleman, one Mr. John Grant, a man of sufficient estate
for his own charge, and lived well in his country; but
of no great ability to help in the business, otherwise
than by his acquaintance (being well beloved and allied
in that country where they were chiefly to need help).
But for his own person he was as fierce as a lion, of a very
undaunted courage as could be found in a country: which
mind of his he had often showed unto pursuivants and
prowling companions, when they would come to his house
to search and ransack the same, as they did to divers of
his neighbours. But he paid them so well for their labour
not with crowns of gold but with cracked crowns sometimes,
and with dry blows instead of drink and other good cheer,
that they durst not visit him any more, unless they brought
great store of help with them. Truth is, his mettle and
manner of proceeding was so well known unto them, that
it kept them very much in awe and himself in much quiet
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
which he did the rather use, that he might with more safety
keep a Priest in his house, which he did with great fruit
unto his neighbours and comfort to himself. This gentleman
therefore they adjoined to their company, as they had
done Mr. Rookewood, giving to them both the oath of
secrecy, according to their custom.
</p>

<p>
Then they called in one Mr. Robert
Keyes, a grave and sober man, and of great wit and
sufficiency, as I have heard divers say, that were well
acquainted with him. His virtue and valour were the
chiefest things wherein they could expect assistance from
him; for otherwise, his means were not great, but in those
two, by report, he had great measure. More was the pity
that such men, so worthy to be esteemed, should lose
themselves in such a labyrinth of erring courses.
</p>

<p>
But of all others, he that was most pitied and generally
most commended of all men, was the next whom Mr.
Catesby thought fit to acquaint with the matter, therein to
have his help and assistance in all kinds, both for counsel
and forces and provision of money, of horses and armour
and men and followers; in all which, put them all together
and there was not such a man amongst them. And this
was Sir Everard Digby, a Knight of great
living and great account in his country. He was of an ancient
and great family, whose ancestors were a great help to the
suppressing of Richard III. the tyrant, and the bringing and
setting up of King Henry VII. from whom our King James
is lineally descended: whereupon King Henry did make
Knights in the field seven brothers of his house at one time,
from whom descended divers houses of that name, which
live all in good reputation in their several countries. But
this Sir Everard Digby was the heir of the eldest and chiefest
house, and one of the chiefest men in Rutlandshire where
he dwelt, as his ancestors had done before him, though he
had also much living in Leicestershire and other shires
adjoining. His estate was not fully come into his hands,
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
for his mother lived, who had above seven or eight hundred
pounds a year; but he had in his hands above 2,000 marks
a year. This gentleman was always Catholicly affected,
and heir unto the piety of his parents, as well as to their
living: for they were ever the most noted and known
Catholics in that country. And although this gentleman
being left a ward by his Father's untimely death, was not
brought up Catholicly in his youth, but at the University
by his guardians, as other young gentlemen use to be; yet
when he came to be of riper years, and had the guiding of
himself and his own estate, he affected most the company
of Catholics and finding by them the necessity not only of
believing but of practising also and professing that religion,
he presently made election rather to suffer with Catholic
religion, and to bear with Catholics the cross of persecution
than to rise with heresy and to be advanced in the Court,
which until then he had followed, and was as likely to
be raised as any there, if he would have followed the
time. For indeed to do him right, he was as complete a
man in all things that deserved estimation or might win
affection, as one should see in a kingdom. He was of
stature about two yards high, very little lower than Mr.
Catesby but of stronger making; of countenance so comely
and manlike, that when he was taken and brought up to the
Court (not in the best case to make show of himself as you
may imagine), yet some of the chiefest in the Court seeing
him out of a window brought in that manner, lamented
him much, and said he was the goodliest man in the whole
Court. He was skilful in all things that belonged unto a
gentleman, very cunning at his weapon, much practised and
expert in riding of great horses, of which he kept divers in
his stable continually with a skilful rider for them. For
other sports of hunting or hawking, which gentlemen in
England so much use and delight in, he had the best of
both kinds in the country round about, insomuch that he
made that the colour of his going into Warwickshire at this
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
time, and of drawing company together of his friends, as it
were to a match of hunting which he had made. For all
manner of games which are also usual for gentlemen in foul
weather, when they are forced to keep house, he was not
only able therein to keep company with the best; but was
so cunning in them all, that those who knew him well, had
rather take his part than be against him. He was a good
musician and kept divers good musicians in his house;
and himself also could play well of divers instruments.
But those who were well acquainted with him do affirm that
in gifts of mind he excelled much more than in his natural
parts; although in those also it were hard to find so many
in one man in such a measure. But of wisdom he had an
extraordinary talent, such a judicial wit and so well able to
discern and discourse of any matter, as truly I have heard
many say they have not seen the like of a young man, and
that his carriage and manner of discourse were more like to
a grave Councillor of State, than to a gallant of the Court
as he was, and a man but of twenty-six years old (which
I think was his age or thereabouts). And though his
behaviour were courteous to all, and offensive to none, yet
was he a man of great courage and of noted valour, which
at his end he showed plainly to the world, all men seeing
and affirming that he made no account at all of death.
He was so studious a follower of virtue, after he became
Catholic, that he gave great comfort to those that had the
guiding of his soul (as I have heard them seriously affirm
more than once or twice), he used his prayers daily both
mental and vocal, and daily and diligent examination of his
conscience: the Sacraments he frequented devoutly every
week, and to that end kept a Priest in his house continually,
who for virtue and learning hath not many his betters in
England. Briefly I have heard it reported of this Knight by
those that knew him well, and that were often in his company,
that they did note in him a special care of avoiding
all occasions of sin and of furthering acts of virtue in what
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
he could; to which end he was not only studious to bring
as many to be Catholics as he could (studying books of
purpose to enable himself in that kind), and brought in
divers of that sort and some of great account and place.
Not only in this highest kind, wherein he took very great joy
and comfort, but also in ordinary talk, when he had observed
that the speech did tend to any evil, as detraction or other
kind of evil words which sometimes will happen in company,
his custom was presently to take some occasion to alter the
talk, and cunningly to bring in some other good matter or
profitable subject to talk of. And this, when the matter was
not very grossly evil, or spoken to the dishonour of God or
disgrace of His servants; for then, his zeal and courage
were such, that he could not bear it, but would publicly and
stoutly contradict it, whereof I could give divers instances
worth relating, but am loth to hold the reader longer; having
written thus much of him, that it may appear what was the
cause why he was so much and so generally lamented, and
is so much esteemed and praised by all sorts in England,
both Catholics and others, although neither side do or
can approve this last outrageous and exorbitant attempt
against our King and country, wherein a man otherwise so
worthy, was so unworthily lost and cast away to the great
grief of all that knew him and especially of all that loved
him. And truly it was hard to do the one and not the
other.
</p>

<p>
The last of all that was called to be
partaker in this treacherous plot was Mr. Francis Tresham,
a gentleman of Northamptonshire of great estate, esteemed
then worth 3,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a year. His parents had been long time
Catholic and his father often in prison for his conscience,
although he paid the statute duly besides of 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month for
his refusing to go to Church with heretics. This gentleman
had been wild in his youth, and even till his end was not
known to be of so good example as the rest, though, towards
his later years, much reclaimed and good hope conceived of
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
him by divers of good judgment. I think Mr. Catesby
(who was his near kinsman) did chiefly acquaint him with
the matter in regard of his help by provision of money
which Mr. Tresham was as well able to do as the best,
and thought to be as likely to be both faithful and forward
as any, having been, before, a companion with them in
that action of the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and both then and since, continually discontented
with the proceedings of the State. But it is thought by
most, that Mr. Tresham had not that zeal for the advancement
of the Catholics' cause in respect of itself, as the others
had. And it seems by Mr. Winter's confession, they also
repented afterwards that they had made him of their
council, fearing him to be the man who had opened the
matter and so defeated them of their purpose; whereof
I must treat in the next chapter.
</p>

<p>
But these gentlemen being thus added to the number
of the conspirators, they then began to conclude amongst
themselves how everything should be acted, as saith Mr.
Winter. They designed Mr. Faulkes to be the man that
should strike that first and fatal stroke and attend upon the
powder ready prepared in the cellar, to set it on fire with a
match, when the hour appointed should be come, which
should be the first day of the Parliament, because then the
King would certainly be there, and all the Lords also (but
those whom they meant to keep from thence by some
means or other), likewise all their Bishops and most of the
chiefest Puritans of the land.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Percy his office should be (with a certain company
ready to assist him) presently after that first blow to enter
the place where the young Prince or the Duke Charles
were kept, to seize upon his person, who being safely
placed in the custody of Catholics, presently they would
have proclaimed him King. Sir Everard Digby was in
Warwickshire at the time appointed, as it was agreed
amongst them, where, under pretence of a hunting match
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
(having brought his hawks and hounds to Dunsmore Heath
for the purpose, and hunted there two or three days before),
he gathered many of his friends together, and had himself
great store of men, and many fair and goodly horses.
He had also made great provision of armour and shot,
which he sent before him in a cart with some trusty
servants, and had made ready above 1,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> in ready coin,
as his servants since have averred that did escape, and one
of them delivered up great part of the money to the King's
officers so soon as he saw his master fallen into the lapse.
</p>

<p>
Their intention was that if they failed of the Prince
or Duke about London, which was not unlike they
should, then would some of them hasten down to Sir
Everard Digby after the blow were given, others stopping
the ways that no news might pass but by their permission;
and then should Sir Everard Digby have made
sure, with his forces and friends, to have taken the Lady
Elizabeth out of the Lord Harrington his hands, whom
then they would presently have proclaimed heir-apparent
to the Crown. Then had they (as is expressed in their
confessions) a proclamation ready penned, wherein they
would have commanded all sorts of men, by authority
of the Prince or Princess, who would have been in their
custody, to assist the quiet settling of the young King
or Queen in their seat. They would have offered freedom
from all taxes and impositions, and payments of subsidies,
and such like; and for religion, they would have left it
as yet free for all sorts to follow their own conscience
without compulsion, which afterwards they meant (saith
the printed confession) to have set better in order. And
so indeed the Catholics are able to perform it, if they
might have freedom, by many means more effectual than
force of arms, in such an unsettled State as that must
needs have been for a time; and by many means more
effectual than heretics have, who therefore only use the
sword. For, if the truth might freely be preached, if
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
the lives and examples of Catholics, and especially of
Religious Orders, might be seen and suffered in public,
if those that be followers of the Apostles, and expert in
their trade of fishing for men, might be freely permitted
to use and show their skill in gaining of souls, no doubt
then but the sun shining so bright, as it would be seen
to do in the doctrine of Truth, would disperse the clouds
of error; no doubt but the candle set upon the candlestick
would give light unto many minds that now are groping
in the Egyptian darkness of heresy. And no question
but many and great fishes would be taken, when the night
being past, our Lord would both license and direct His
servants to cast their net on the right hand, and that such
a net as would not break, the net of Peter that is entire and
undivided, although it be able to catch at one draught a
hundred, fifty and three great fishes, wherein is
designed by a great and certain number an uncertain and
not to be numbered gain of souls, that the Apostles and
Apostolic men should gain to Christ. And this these
gentlemen hoped had been the time. But God, in Whose
only hands and disposition are the moments of time, and
Who hath placed bounds and limits unto the sea, and saith
unto it, <q>Usque huc venies et non procedes amplius
et hic confringes tumentes fluctus tuos:</q><note place='foot'><q>Hitherto thou shalt come, and shalt go no further, and here thou shalt
break thy swelling waves</q> (Job xxxviii. 11).</note> He Who is the
Master must be also the Measurer of time, and He will not
easily make men of His council when their afflictions shall
end and how far they shall proceed; especially such men as
themselves will not follow counsel, but run headlong upon
such a course as this, which no wise man could or would
have counselled. No, on the contrary side, that was verified
in this practice which Christ foretold unto St. Peter, when
upon zeal he drew his sword in defence of his Master,
</p>

<p>
<q>Omnes qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt,</q><note place='foot'><q>All that take the sword, shall perish with the sword</q> (St. Matt. xxvi. 52).</note>
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
said our Lord, forewarning all men, that howsoever they
may receive the sword or use it, when it is given them
by authority (as it is to all lawful governors and officers in
commonwealths), yet to take the sword (which noteth a
private will or power not authorized) is not without a
fault, nor shall be without a fall. And so it happened
to these conspirators, as the sequent chapter will declare.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII.
How, The Parliament Drawing Near, The Whole
Plot Was Discovered, And That Which Ensued
Thereupon.</head>

<p>
The mercies of God are great, and His patient expectance
of us, granting time and occasions and motives to repent,
is most gracious and full of longanimity. The foresaid
conspirators had intended and prepared, as you have heard,
the utter destruction and overthrow both of the King with
the chiefest of his family, of the Council also, with most of
the nobility, and with their clergy, and others that belonged
to both the Houses of Parliament. But the mercies of
God were such, that He would not permit so great and
universal a ruin to light upon so many, and amongst them
so many worthy persons, amongst whom, it is to be hoped,
His infinite wisdom hath foreseen many upon whom His
goodness will bestow His grace hereafter, and so make
them vessels of election, who now perhaps, in ignorant
zeal, do persecute the servants of Christ and Christ in
them.
</p>

<p>
And if there were any there who finally will prove but
cockle in the field, yet the Father of the family
would not have them so digged out as His unskilful
servants desired, <q>ne forte eradicantibus illis zizania, eradicatum
fuisset simul et triticum.</q><note place='foot'><q>Lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root up the wheat also together
with it</q> (St. Matt. xiii. 29).</note> We hope and pray for
much good unto many of those, who should have been
present at that eruption of fire, if it had succeeded according
to their intent, which God forbid. And God did forbid
it, for no doubt it was His will it should be discovered,
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
which happened in this manner. About ten days before
the Parliament should have begun the Lord Mounteagle
(whose affection to Catholics hath long time been known
unto divers) being at his own house and at supper, a man
came to his page in the street and delivered him a letter
wishing him to deliver the same unto his Lord's own
hands, which the page performed, but made no stay of
the bringer thereof, who presently departed. The Lord
Mounteagle not knowing the hand, and seeing no name
subscribed, caused one of his men to read it unto him,
and it was of this tenour.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The letter sent to the
Lord Mounteagle.</note>
<q>My Lord, out of the love I bear to some
of your friends, I have a care of your preservation, therefore
I would advise you, as you tender your life, to devise some
excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament, for
God and man have concurred to punish the wickedness
of this time. And think not slightly of this advertisement,
but retire yourself into your country, where you may expect
the event in safety. For though there be no appearance
of any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a terrible blow
this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurts
them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it
may do you good, and can do you no harm, for the
danger is past so soon as you have burnt the letter. And
I hope God will give you the grace to make use of it,
to Whose holy protection I commend you.</q>
</p>

<p>
This was the letter which the Lord Mounteagle having
considered, and seeing so dangerous matter contained in it,
he presently went to the Lord of Salisbury, who is Chief
Secretary to His Majesty, and delivered the letter unto
him, with relation of all circumstances in the receipt and
reading of the letter. The Lord of Salisbury seemed
not at the first to make any great account of it, yet said
he would acquaint some other Lords of the Council with
the same, and commended the Lord Mounteagle for his
fidelity and care of His Majesty's safety, and of the State,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and presently showed the letter to the Lord Chamberlain,
and then both of them thought the letter might have some
relation with other informations the Lord of Salisbury
had received from beyond seas, concerning some business
intended by the Papists; and they seemed to think
there might be some perilous attempt intended. And
therefore they two concluded to join with them three
other of the Council, to wit, the Lord Admiral, the Earl
of Worcester and Northampton, to be acquainted with
this matter; who having all of them concurred together to
the examination of the contents of the said letter, they
did conclude (saith the book written of the discovery of
this treason) that how slight soever a matter it might
at the first appear, yet was it not absolutely to be contemned,
in respect of the care which it behoved them to
have of the preservation of His Majesty's person. Yet they
resolved, for two reasons, first to acquaint the King himself
with the same, before they proceeded to any further
inquisition in the matter, as well (saith the book) for the
expectation and experience they had of His Majesty's
fortunate judgment in clearing and solving of obscure
riddles and doubtful mysteries, as also because the more
time would in the meanwhile be given for the practice to
ripen (if any was) whereby the discovery might be the more
clear and evident, and the ground of proceeding thereupon
more safe, just, and easy. And so according to their
determination the said Earl of Salisbury did repair to
the King upon the Friday after, being All-Hallow-day,
which was the day after His Majesty's arrival from Royston,
where he had been at his hunting exercise, and was come
up to London to be present at the beginning of the Parliament.
The Earl therefore finding the King alone in
his gallery, without any other speech or judgment giving
of the letter, but only relating simply the form of the
delivery thereof, he presented it to His Highness. The
King no sooner read the letter, but after a little pause,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
and then reading it over again, he delivered his judgment
of it in such sort, as he thought it was not to be contemned;
for that the style of it seemed to be more quick
and pithy than is usual to be in any pasquil or libel,
the superfluities of idle brains. But the Earl of Salisbury
perceiving the King to apprehend it deeplier than he looked
for, knowing his nature, told him that he thought by one
sentence in it, that it was like to be written by some
fool or madman, reading to him that sentence in it, <q>For
the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the letter,</q>
which he said was likely to be the saying of a fool;
for if the danger was past so soon as the letter was burnt,
then the warning behoved to be of little avail, when the
burning of the letter might make the danger to be
eschewed. But the King by the contrary, considering the
former sentence in the letter, <q>That they should receive
a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet should not
see who hurt them;</q> joining it to the sentence immediately
following already alleged, did thereupon conjecture that
the danger mentioned should be some sudden danger by
blowing up of powder. For no other insurrection, rebellion,
or whatsoever other private and desperate attempt could
be committed or attempted in time of Parliament and the
authors thereof unseen except only if it were by a blowing
up of powder, which might be performed by one base
knave in a dark corner: whereupon he was moved to
interpret and construe the later sentence in the letter
(alleged by the Earl of Salisbury against all ordinary sense
and construction in grammar) as if by these words, <q>For the
danger is past as soon as you have burned the letter,</q>
should be closely understood the suddenty and quickness
of the danger, which should be as quickly performed and
at an end, as that paper should be of blazing up in the fire,
turning the word of <q>as soon</q> to the sense of <q>as quickly;</q>
and therefore His Majesty wished that before his going to
the Parliament, the under rooms to the Parliament House
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
might be well and narrowly searched. The Earl of Salisbury
wondering at this His Majesty's commentary, which
he knew to be so far contrary to his ordinary and natural
disposition, who did rather ever sin upon the other side,
in not apprehending nor trusting the advertisements of
practices and perils when he was freely informed of them,
and interpreting rightly this extraordinary caution at this
time to proceed from the vigilant care he had of the whole
State more than of his own person, yet he thought good
to dissemble still unto the King, that there was any just
cause of such apprehension, and ended the present talk
with some merry jest as his custom is. But though he
seemed to neglect it to His Majesty, yet he could not be
at rest till with the Lord Chamberlain he came again unto
His Majesty, at which time it was agreed that the said
Lord Chamberlain should according to his custom and
office view all the Parliament Houses both above and
below, and consider what likelihood or appearance of any
such danger might be gathered: but yet this was deferred
until the afternoon before the sitting down of the Parliament,
which was upon the Monday following: at what time,
he according to this conclusion went to the Parliament
House accompanied with the Lord Mounteagle, where
having viewed all the lower rooms, he found in the vault
under the Upper House great store and provision of billets,
faggots, and coals: and inquiring of Whyneyard, keeper of
the wardrobe, to what use he had put the lower rooms and
cellars, he told him that Mr. Thomas Percy had hired both
the house and part of the cellar or vault under the same and
that the wood and coal therein was the said gentleman's
own provision. Whereupon the Lord Chamberlain looking
into the room perceived a fellow standing in a corner, who
called himself the said Percy his man, and keeper of that
house for him, but indeed was Guido Faulks, the man that
should have acted that monstrous tragedy.
</p>

<p>
The Lord Chamberlain looking upon all things with a
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
heedful eye, though in outward show he seemed careless,
presently addressed himself to the King, and in the presence
of the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral, the Earls of
Worcester, Northampton, and Salisbury, he made his report
what he had seen and observed there, affirming that he did
wonder not a little at the extraordinary great provision of
wood and coal in that house where Thomas Percy had so
seldom occasion to remain, as likewise it gave him in his
mind, that his man looked like a very tall and desperate
fellow. This could not but increase the King's former apprehension,
whereupon he willed that those billets and coals
should be searched to the bottom: and of the same opinion
were the Lords there present, although they thought it fit to
have it done in the night, and by a Justice of Peace only
under pretence of searching for some of the King's stuff
that was missing; and this for two reasons; one was lest
if nothing were found, it should seem the King and State
were too suspicious of every light toy; also for that they
said it would lay an ill-favoured imputation upon the Earl
of Northumberland, one of His Majesty's greatest subjects
and Councillors: this Thomas Percy being his kinsman and
most confident familiar.
</p>

<p>
Thus far the book of the discovery of this treason discourseth
of the manner how the same did come to light.
And because the same was set forth by authority, with desire
that men all should conceive this to be the manner how it
came to light, it may be thought that so it was. Yet there
want not many others of great judgment, that think His
Majesty and divers of those Councillors also, who had the
scanning of the letter, to be well able in shorter time and
with fewer doubts to decipher a darker riddle and find out
a greater secret than that matter was, after so plain a letter
was delivered, importing in so plain terms an intended
punishment both by God and man, and so terrible a blow
to be given at that very time and yet the actors invisible.
And those that be of this opinion do persuade themselves
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
the matter came out by some other means, and that this
letter was but framed and sent of purpose to give another
show of casual discovery both to hide the true means and
to make the especial preservation of the King and State to
be better discerned to come from God Himself. Unto
which opinion they were the rather inclined by the circumstance
of the matter. First, in that the Lord Mounteagle did
that night wherein the letter was to be delivered, appoint a
supper to be made for him at his own house a mile or two
out of London, where he had not supped or lain of a twelve-month
and more before that time, and therefore strange that
party should seek him there. Then the manner of delivery
seemed strange, to be so weakly handled by any that had
judgment as to be delivered to a page and to be read by
his Lord in the time of supper, when he could not with
safety have concealed the matter, if he would. Again it
was so written, as that my Lord of Salisbury might well
say it was like to be the writing of a fool or a madman. For
no other assuredly would have committed so great a secret
to ink and paper in so plain manner and that so long
before the time; especially there being many other means
likely enough to be effectual for the staying of my Lord
Mounteagle from the Parliament that one day, and that
without his danger of concealing any practice against the
State. For if some special friend had seemed to be in
extremity and sent for him in the instant, he would not
have failed him. Besides many sudden occasions would
have sufficed, as a certain and present opportunity of some
commodious bargain for provision of money or jewels or
such like, which courtiers often have want of, if another,
time would not have served, would have been more likely
to call him that very morning than this letter so delivered
to stay him ten days before.
</p>

<p>
But although many were of opinion that this was not
the first means of this discovery, yet none that ever I could
hear of, was able to give a certain judgment, which way
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
indeed it was discovered. It seems the gentlemen themselves
did most fear Mr. Francis Tresham to be the man that should
send this letter unto the Lord Mounteagle, which Lord had
married Mr. Tresham his sister. But that was nothing likely,
for he was very witty; and surely the sending of such a
letter in such a manner was nothing wittingly contrived, if
it were done <hi rend='italic'>bona fide</hi>; neither would Mr. Tresham have
adventured his life and estate (which was great) for his
brother-in-law, if he had not thought him worthy of further
trust. For if he did not think the letter would persuade,
why should he write it so plainly to the overthrow of
the business and so also of himself, which if the Lord
followed not his counsel, must needs follow. And if
he did believe it would persuade, why did he not rather
do it by word of mouth the very morning it should
have been done, which for divers reasons had been most
likely to be effectual; whereas on the other side he might
well think the Lord Mounteagle could not discern by the
letter, whether it came from friend or foe, being without
name and in an unknown hand: and from a friend he
could not think it being sent in so simple and yet so public
manner. If from a foe, he were undone, if he did conceal
it. No, Mr. Tresham had too much wit to deal so sillily in a
thing of such importance. More did doubt want of fidelity
than of wit in Mr. Tresham, and therefore it was rather
supposed, by most that doubted him to be the man, that
he first opened the matter unto the Council, as thinking
thereby to be raised to some place of credit, which then he
might think himself with wit and living able to bear out with
the best. This opinion was the rather believed afterwards,
when it was evident that none of the rest had done it, who
were privy unto the matter; but that every one of them either
died in the field because they would not be taken, or being
taken were all executed and so left not the least suspicion
of having opened the matter. Again, this opinion was
increased when the matter being discovered, all the gentlemen
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
fled into Warwickshire and then according to their
former designments, rose in arms, thinking to have made a
head. But Mr. Tresham staid still in London and never
stirred foot, though as far in as the best. And thirdly, the
opinion was yet more confirmed when afterwards Mr.
Tresham was also taken and kept close prisoner, at which
time the general bruit was, that he confessed all he
knew; but none of his confessions were published, neither
did himself ever come to light afterwards, but died in the
Tower; so that it is not known what he had discovered first
or last, or what he would have confirmed, or repented, if
he had come unto his trial and execution as the rest
did.
</p>

<p>
But whosoever was the discoverer of this matter or by
what means soever it came to light, we are much to thank
God that it was discovered, from whom we must acknowledge
the benefit received as from the chief cause, <q>a quo
omne donum optimum et omne bonum procedit,</q><note place='foot'><q>Every best gift and every perfect is from above</q> (St. James i. 17).</note> and
these especially which most concern the public good.
</p>

<p>
The letter therefore being so understood as before I
declared, and the place itself being viewed by the Lord
Chamberlain giving such cause of suspicion, as is already
noted, that night following being Monday night (when the
Parliament should have begun <emph>and ended also</emph> the next day)
Sir Thomas Knevet, a gentleman of His Majesty's Privy
Chamber, was sent to search the place at midnight under
pretence of looking for some other things as was before
devised. When he came to the Parliament House before his
entry into Mr. Percy his lodging, he found the foresaid man
that had the keeping of the house for Mr. Percy standing
without the house and seeing him with his clothes on and
booted at so dead a time of the night, the Justice apprehended
him: and after went forward to the searching of the
house, where after he had caused to be overturned some of
the billets and coals, he first found one of the small barrels
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
of powder, and after, all the rest, to the number of thirty-six
barrels great and small. And thereafter searching the
fellow whom he had taken, found three matches and all
other instruments fit for blowing up of the powder ready
upon him: which made him instantly to confess what his
intent was, affirming withal that if he had happened to have
been within the house when he was taken, as he was
immediately before at the ending of his work, he would not
have failed to have blown up the Justice, house and all,
belike imagining that some part of the danger might have
lit upon the Court and done some harm to those, to whom
he most desired it. For otherwise I know not what
meaning he should have, unless by his own sudden death
also, which would have followed, he meant to escape the
extremity of torture which he might well expect: but
this we did not hear that he attempted afterwards to
himself nor seemed to desire it.
</p>

<p>
This done, the prisoner was carried fast bound unto
the Court and the news of all particulars presently carried
unto the King by those of the Council who lay in the
house, although it were but four hours after midnight.
Afterwards all the rest of the Council being sent for
into the town, they examined the prisoner, who both to
the Council and to all the rest that spake with him that
day, appeared so constant and settled upon his grounds,
as all the Council said they thought they had found another
Mutius Scævola born in England. For notwithstanding the
horror of the fact, his sudden surprising, the terror which
might have been stricken into him by coming into such a
presence and the restless and confused questions that every
man all that day did vex him with, yet was his countenance
so far from being dejected, as he often smiled in scornful
manner, not only avowing the fact, but repenting only with
the said Scævola his failing in the execution thereof,
whereof, he said, the devil and not God was the discoverer:
answering quickly to every man's objection, scoffing at
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
many idle questions that were propounded unto him and
jesting with such as he thought had no authority to
examine him. All that day the Council could get nothing
out of him concerning his complices, refusing to answer to
any such questions which he thought might discover the
plot and laying all the blame upon himself, whereunto he
said he was moved only for religion and conscience sake,
denying the King to be his lawful sovereign or the anointed
of God, in respect he was an heretic; and would acknowledge
no other name to himself but John Johnson, servant to
Thomas Percy. But after he had been three or four days
in the Tower and was threatened the rack only, as the
printed book saith (though the common voice was, that he
was extremely racked the first days), then, whether to avoid
torments, or for that he might understand that the gentlemen
had discovered themselves by rising up in arms in the
country, he <emph>then</emph> named some of his complices, with his own
name also, and how the matter was broken unto him, and
how begun and prosecuted, as I have before declared;
yet I cannot find by his confession which is published in
print, that he named above six of those who had wrought
in the mine and provision of the powder and who then were
all known to be up in arms. And here we must leave this
prisoner, who now was known to be Guido Faulks, close kept
in the Tower; and will let you see what course the rest of
the conspirators took, when they understood the matter was
plainly discovered.
</p>

<p>
First, upon the knowledge that such a letter was
delivered to the Lord Mounteagle ten days before, they
grew very doubtful of the matter, and fearing only Mr.
Tresham in that kind, had divers meetings with him to
examine and try him how far he had proceeded. But he
forswearing all and that he knew nothing how it came
about, they had divers consultations what were best to do;
but (as Mr. Thomas Winter saith in his confession) first
that Mr. Catesby resolved, he would not fly his country,
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
he would see further yet. And then they sent Mr.
Faulks to see if all were well in the cellar, who adventured
to go notwithstanding the doubt and returned to them at
night and told them all was yet well, which it seems gave
them some hope, yet afterwards when they heard what
conference had passed between my Lord of Salisbury and
His Majesty about the letter, they gave it lost the second
time, and then Mr. Catesby would not go until Mr. Percy
were come up, who came the next day and he would needs
abide the uttermost trial. But upon Tuesday morning
(which was the day appointed for the fact) Mr. Faulks being
taken in the search that night as is declared, they heard and
saw so many and so plain circumstances, that they must
needs know the whole matter was discovered and no hope at
all that way to be left them. Then they, being all excellently
well horsed, rode into the country keeping the highway; but
so fast a pace and with such a resolution, that it was very
hard to overtake them and would not have been easy to have
stayed them. They rode two and three together; and they
did ride that day notwithstanding the foulness of the winter
ways to Dunchurch (which I take it, is almost eighty<note place='foot'>Is above 60. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> miles),
where Sir Everard Digby stayed in readiness to have
surprised the person of the King's daughter in case they
had brought other news. But they bringing such news as
was little expected and less welcome, as it may well be
supposed, they all entered into consultation what was best
to be done, and it was much marvelled at by divers of Sir
Everard Digby his friends, who were there with him in
company for his match of hunting, to see so many gallant
gentlemen come in of sudden so late in the evening and so
well appointed. And seeing them enter into serious consultation
in a chamber apart, they knew not what to make
of it; but soon after they might perceive, when they all
came out, as men resolved upon some enterprise. And Sir
Everard caused all his men and horses presently to be ready
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
and departed with them. Mr. Catesby also and other of the
gentlemen had prepared their horses and furniture ready in
that place beforehand, although they thought they should
have used it with more advantage. For now when the
matter was known and bruited in the country, that such an
act should have been performed in London, which had
failed and that all was safe there, and that it was apparent
these were the conspirators by the course they took, none
would come to assist them;<note place='foot'>Neither friends to their persons, nor friends to their religion. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in
Orig.</hi></note> nor had they any with them,
but such servants and followers as themselves had provided
beforehand under other pretences, which therefore for
danger of giving suspicion could not be many. Neither do
I think they were ever above eighty in the whole company,
although the fame in other countries went first that they were
150, then 300, and some said they were 1,000 strong. But
if that had been so, it is like the matter had not been so
soon ended, as it proved to be.<note place='foot'>But this bruit, indeed, had been the likeliest way to increase their number
by the resort of other Catholics from other countries, if the fact itself had not
disliked other Catholics, and their minds had not been well prepared beforehand
to refuse all such attempts by the persuasion of Father Garnett and others
by his direction, according to the order sent from His Holiness and the like
commandment also from Father General and Father Persons, as before hath
been declared. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> But these conspirators, as
it seems, hoped the matter would prove otherwise than it
did, and that many would have joined with them, when once
they saw them gathered to a head. And to make their
rising the more bruited and withal to furnish themselves of
some horses for the great saddle, they went presently to
Warwick and there out of a house which is adjoining to the
Castle, they seized upon certain great horse belonging to
some noblemen and gentlemen which were kept there by a
rider to be taught. From thence they went and took all
my Lord Winsor's armour, which by report was able to
furnish a much greater company then ever they had with
them. From thence they went forward through Worcestershire
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
towards Staffordshire, offering no violence or hurt
to any.<note place='foot'>But expecting belike that divers Catholic gentlemen of those countries
(where there be very many, and some of great worth and large estates) should
have come unto them. And Mr. Thomas Winter was sent unto one of the
greatest (whose daughter Mr. Robert Winter aforesaid had married), but he
caused his gates to be shut against him and would not so much as hear him
speak. And yet the said gentleman was afterward in great trouble and had like
to have lost all his estate, as bearing good-will unto them. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.
The lines of erasure extend over the following sentence also.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The country in the meantime began to rise on every
side, yet none did as yet set upon them, nor until Friday
following;<note place='foot'>This must be in. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi></note> and on Thursday night they came to one
Mr. Stephen Littleton's house in Staffordshire, who had
adjoined himself unto them. And being there it pleased
God to send them such a fortune as seemed very much
to alter their resolutions, and made them resolve neither
to fight nor fly, but to give up themselves willingly unto
death. For in the morning early when some were gone
abroad to discover what companies were coming, and
others were preparing their shot and powder in a readiness,
because there was some of the powder that they
thought to be somewhat dankish which they set before
the fire and were busy about it, whilst behold, a spark
falling out of the fire took hold of the powder, and that
blowing up, hurt divers of them, especially Mr. Catesby,
Mr. Rookewood, but most of all Mr. Grant, whose face was
much disfigured, and his eyes almost burnt out. This
loe<note place='foot'>Compare the German <q>Lohe,</q> a flame. Some English dictionaries give
<q>Low,</q> a local and obsolete word, with the same meaning.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> made them see it was not best for them to proceed
in their commenced course; and, as it seems, they took
it for a sign of God's will that He would not have them
prepare to resist, but rather to prepare themselves to
suffer, which they did. For, as Mr. Thomas Winter said
in his confession, when himself (with Mr. Littleton being
abroad in the fields to discover) had understood of this
heavy chance, and the matter being told him by his man
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
in worse sort than indeed it was (to wit, that Mr. Catesby,
Mr. Rookewood, and Mr. Grant were burnt up with powder,
and the rest of the company dispersed upon sight thereof),
he resolving not to fly, as Mr. Littleton advised him, but
first to see and bury the body of his friend Mr. Catesby,
so returned back to the house, and there found the gentlemen
reasonable well in respect of what he had heard,
and asked them what they resolved to do. They answered,
<q>We mean here to die.</q> Then said Mr. Thomas Winter,
<q>I will take such part as you do.</q> Then they all fell
earnestly to their prayers, the Litanies and such like (as
since some of the company affirmed that escaped taking,
being none of the conspirators, but such as joined with
them in the country); they also spent an hour in meditation,
and divers of their company departed to shift for
themselves, the house being not yet beset.
</p>

<p>
About an hour before mid-day the High Sheriff came
with the forces of the country and beset the house. Mr.
Thomas Winter going into the court of the house was
shot into the shoulder with which he lost the use of his
arm. The next shot was the elder Wright, who was
stricken dead. After him the younger Wright, and fourthly
Mr. Rookewood, but he was only wounded in four or
five places, and so taken and afterwards put to death at
London. So were also Mr. Thomas Winter and Mr. Grant
and all the rest but Mr. Catesby and Mr. Percy, who
resolved they would not be taken, but rather suffer death
at that time in the field. Wherefore Mr. Catesby took
from his neck a cross of gold which he always used to
wear about him, and blessing himself with it and kissing
it, showed it unto the people, protesting there solemnly
before them all, it was only for the honour of the Cross,
and the exaltation of that Faith which honoured the Cross,
and for the saving of their souls in the same Faith, that
had moved him to undertake the business; and sith he
saw it was not God's will it should succeed in that manner
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
they intended or at that time, he was willing and ready
to give his life for the same cause, only he would not
be taken by any, and against that only he would defend
himself with his sword.<note place='foot'>He also protested there was no more the conspiracy than those who had
there published themselves by that public rising in arms. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi>
This is not good to be in, because of Mr. Tresham, who was one, and not with
them. <hi rend='italic'>In marg. in another hand.</hi></note> This done, Mr. Catesby and Mr.
Percy turned back to back, resolving to yield themselves to
no man, but to death as to the messenger of God. None
of their adversaries did come near them; but one fellow
standing behind a tree with a musket shot them both
with one bullet, and Mr. Catesby was shot almost dead, the
other lived three or four days.<note place='foot'>If he lived so many days, he should have carried from that place and
examined, etc. <hi rend='italic'>In marg. in yet another hand.</hi></note> Mr. Catesby being fallen
to the ground, as they say, went upon his knees into the
house, and there got a picture of our Blessed Lady in his
arms (unto whom he was accustomed to be very devout),
and so embracing and kissing the same he died.
</p>

<p>
Some of the chiefest of them did think to have escaped,
as Sir Everard Digby, Mr. Robert Winter, and Mr. Stephen
Littleton; and these two last knowing the country better
than the other, did indeed escape for the time.<note place='foot'>And got to some friends' houses, where they lived safe for a month or
more, but afterwards were discovered and taken. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> Sir
Everard Digby thinking also to take that course, offered all
his servants that they might take their horses and money
and shift for themselves. But his page and one other said
they would never leave him but against their will. Therefore
being well mounted, they three went together, but
they found the country so up on every side, and all
drawing towards the place where the voice was the conspirators
were beset, that it was not possible for them to
pass or go unknown, especially Sir Everard Digby, being
so noted a man for his stature and personage, and withal
so well appointed as he was. Whereupon he did rather
choose (after he had gained a little ground) to strike into
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
a wood, and thought there in a dry pit to have staid
with his horses until the company had been passed. But
they tracked his horses unto the very pit side, and then
cried out, <q>Here he is, here he is.</q> Sir Everard being
altogether undaunted, answered, <q>Here he is indeed, what
then?</q> and advanced his horse in the manner of curvetting
(which he was expert in) and thought to have borne them
over, and so to break from them, esteeming them to be
but ten or twelve persons, whom he saw about the pit,
and though he made them easily give way, yet then he
saw above a hundred people hard by and coming upon
him: so that seeing it in vain to resist, he willingly yielded
himself to the likeliest man of the company, upon a desire
he had to have some time before his death for his better
preparation, and withal out of a desire (as it afterwards
appeared) to have done some service to the Catholic cause
by word, sith he saw he could not do it by the sword.
For being then taken and carried up to London prisoner
and to the Court, he made earnest request to have spoken
with His Majesty if it might have been admitted, intending
to lay down the causes so plainly which had moved them
to this attempt, and withal how dangerous it was for His
Majesty to take the course he did, as that he hoped to persuade
at least some mitigation, if not toleration, for Catholics.
</p>

<p>
But the Council knowing well how judicial a man he
was, and how well able to work his intent with sound
reasons, would not assent unto his desire, but sent him
presently prisoner unto the Tower, where also all the
rest of the conspirators that were taken at Mr. Littleton's
in Staffordshire were presently lodged upon their bringing
up, which was as soon as their hurts would give them leave
to travel. So that only four were slain in the country,
Mr. Robert Catesby, Mr. Thomas Percy, Mr. John Wright,
and his brother, Christopher Wright. The rest were all
put into the Tower for further trial according to law, which
were these: Sir Everard Digby, Mr. Ambrose Rookewood,
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
Mr. Thomas Winter, Mr. John Grant, Mr. Robert Keyes, Mr.
Francis Tresham, and Mr. Guido Faulks, who were there
before; unto them also were adjoined afterwards, Mr.
Robert Winter and Mr. Stephen Littleton, who being discovered<note place='foot'>Let all this be in and stand for the end of this chapter, until you come
to that which is blotted out. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi></note>
in one place where they had been at least a
month, they went into a house of the Widow Littleton's
a woman of great estate, and there were kept in a chamber
by Humphrey Littleton, her alliance, she being then at
London; but their being in that house was found out
by the cook of the house, in the provision of meal, and
so by him they were discovered, and taken by the next
Justices and so carried up to London and laid with the
rest in the Tower. All<note place='foot'>This must be in. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi></note> these prisoners were divers times
examined, but only two of their examinations published
in print, which were of Mr. Guido Faulks and Mr. Thomas
Winter, both which agreed in one, only Mr. Winter's was
the larger, and contained much of the matter which I
have before expressed, concerning their first intention, the
names and number of the conspirators, the course they
took to keep it secret, their manner of proceeding in the
whole, and their intention afterwards to set up one of
the King's children, and with them the Catholic religion.
And both in all their examinations and the whole process
of the matter it appeared plainly they were all and the
only conspirators. The rest of the Catholics were free,
as shall more appear in the chapter following.<note place='foot'>All unto this place must be in. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi> They affirmed constantly
there were no other conspirators than were taken. And as for Priests, they
did both then and at their death protest there was none in the action,
insomuch that it was generally voiced and believed through England that there
was no Priest accused or could be touched with the treason, which gave
generally great satisfaction both to Catholics and others. And so in right it
should still have continued; but the Puritans did much envy that they should
be free from blame, upon whom they wished rather that all might light. And
therefore they began to practise and work the contrary opinion, first in the
King, and afterwards in public show unto the country, as shall afterwards
appear. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII.
How Upon Examination Of The Prisoners It Was
Apparent That No Other Catholics Could Be
Touched With The Conspiracy. The Same Also
Confirmed By His Majesty's Own Words, To The
Great Comfort Of Catholics.</head>

<p>
When all these conspirators were brought to the Tower
(which is the ordinary prison for such as are found guilty
or suspected of high treason, and especially for persons
of account, or in causes of great moment), they were all
severally and several times examined by the Lords of
the Council, and then it was in vain for them either to
hide the matter, which was apparently known in the great
preparation of powder which had been found, or to conceal
the persons or qualities of the conspirators, who had all
published themselves in prosecuting their first intended
treason with a second attempt of public rebellion. Therefore
all did acknowledge the fact, though none would
directly yield it to be an offence to God, though they
said it was so unto their Prince and the present State
of the country. Their examinations did all agree in all
material points, and therefore two only were published in
print, containing the substance of the rest. And indeed
the sum of that which I have been able to say in this
narration touching either their first intentions or the names
or number of the conspirators, or concerning the course
they took to keep the matter so absolutely secret, or,
finally, touching the manner of their beginning and proceeding
in the whole matter; for that (as I noted before)
it being kept as such a vowed secret in the heads and
hearts of so few, and those also afterwards apprehended
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
before they could have means to declare the particulars
in any private manner, therefore no more can be known
of the matter or manner of this tragedy than is found
or gathered out of their examinations. The effect whereof
I have set down before, in prosecution of the story, and
shall not need here to repeat.
</p>

<p>
But this they all agreed in, that no other Catholics were
to be touched with the matter, nor had any ways assisted
them therein, but those who were now well known to the
whole realm by their public rising in arms, of which also
the greatest part did but join with them in the second, and
had not any knowledge at all of the first attempt. Hereupon
it followed, that whereas at the first breaking out
of this monstrous Plot most men according to their humour
and aversion from Catholics and their religion, would
give their censure, that sure many Papists would be touched
with this matter, and especially the Priests no doubt were
the devisers and incentors of this intended fiery treason.
Now after all these prisoners had been often and seriously
examined, their general voice was turned and their conceit
changed, and it was as general a report both in London
and through England, that not one Priest could be touched
with the Plot, nor any other Catholics but those that were
already taken, and some few others that were well known
by their public rebellion, and were in chace in the country
and much watch laid for them everywhere, with public
proclamation and description of their persons, as is usual
in such cases. This, you must think, was a great comfort
unto Catholics in so great a distress; and this comfort
was much increased also, when Catholics did see that
His Majesty did free most of his Catholic subjects
from imputation of this crime in his proclamation about
this matter, dated the 7th of November, which was
after the examination and confessions of Faulks; wherein
naming eight principal heads or contrivers of this conspiracy,
who had published themselves in the country.
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
For in that proclamation, though at the beginning out of
his persuasion of a contrary religion, he do say that they
were persons known to be so utterly corrupted with the
superstition of the Romish religion, as seduced with the
blindness thereof; yet afterwards in the body of the same
proclamation he doth prudently and more equally distinguish
between them and other Catholics, affirming that
by good experience he was so well persuaded of the
loyalty of divers of his said Catholic subjects, that he
held himself assured they do as much abhor this detestable
conspiracy as himself, and would be ready to do their best
endeavours (though with expense of their blood) to suppress
all attempts against his safety and the quiet of his
State, and to discover whomsoever they should suspect
to be of rebellious and traitorous disposition, &amp;c. Which
equanimity of His Majesty distinguishing between the
guilty and the guiltless, did much edify and content all
wise and grave men of what religion soever, who cannot
but greatly detest and condemn the attempt, under what
pretence, cause or intention soever, it were conceived.
</p>

<p>
And as the whole multitude of Catholics were free from
all consent or knowledge thereof, and could not in justice
be touched therewith, so much less the religion which they
profess, which in her doctrine doth no ways allow or avow
any such attempt, whatsoever the enemies thereof, and
namely the Puritans, may persuade His Majesty to the
contrary; as it appeared they began not long after to
labour His Highness upon this occasion, to be so conceited
of Catholics (if they were perfect Catholics indeed) and
so much more of their religion; seeming to think it more
likely in them that were better grounded and more exact
professors of the same religion. To which effect were His
Majesty's words in his public speech in the Parliament
House not long after, in the hearing of all the Puritans,<note place='foot'>Who had much laboured to possess the King with that opinion as being
most for their advantage. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
seeming desirous to give contentment to all parties. For
first after all the conspirators had been thoroughly tried
and examined in the Tower (as I have declared), and that
it was now apparent by all the success of the matter, and
by all their examinations, that not only the multitude of
Catholics were clear, but also that there were no more
to be touched than were already discovered, insomuch
that the general voice and opinion of all men was changed,
as is said before, then did His Majesty in his public speech
confirm again his good opinion of his Catholic subjects
in that behalf; but withal seemed to believe the Puritans
further in their malicious reports of us and our minds, than
upon due trial His Majesty will find to be true. For in
the said speech after he had first given due thanks to God
for his happy delivery from so great a danger, then he
declared whom he took to be the practisers and plotters
of this treason, and seeming to point as it were to the
conspirators already discovered, those he showed to be
men unto which he had not given any cause of disgust.
<q>If, (saith he) these conspirators had only been bankrupt
persons, or discontented upon occasion of any disgrace
done unto them, this might have seemed to be but a work
of revenge. But for my own part, as I scarcely ever knew
any of them, so cannot they allege so much as a pretended
cause of grief.<note place='foot'>By which we may gather that their grief and motives were chiefly for the
common cause, as was gathered before out of their own words and protestations.
<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> And the wretch himself in hands doth
confess that there was no cause moving him or them
but merely and only religion.</q> Where by the way we
may observe both out of the reason which His Majesty
allegeth, and out of their own protestations, wherein they
all agreed, that no particular grudge or respect to themselves
was their motive to this action, but their zeal to the
common cause, though not <q>secundum scientiam.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then His Majesty proceedeth in his speech, admiring
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
<q>that Christian men and Englishmen, and one of them
his sworn servant in an honourable place, should enter into
such a practice, wherein, saith he, their following obstinacy
is so joined to their former malice, as the fellow himself
that is in hand cannot be moved to discover any signs
or notes of repentance, except only that he doth not yet
stand to avow that he repents for not being able to perform
his intent</q> A great testimony being spoken by the King
himself, both of the man's great courage, which could not
be brought down with so great torments as he had then
sustained, and besides of the great opinion he had in his
deceived conscience that the thing was lawful, sith he
would not even then repent that he had intended it, but
only seemed no more to desire the thing itself, which he
might also see God would not have go forward. And
truly this testimony of His Majesty's words doth make
me the rather to believe that of him which was reported
by divers of credit, to wit, that at his apprehension he had
a shirt of hair found upon his back when he was first
searched.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Puritans so ready
to execute severity upon
all Catholics that they
were restrained by the
King.</note>
It followeth then in the King's speech (after the rehearsing
more at large the wonderful manner of his deliverance
by his strange interpretation of the letter, as I set down
before), then he cometh to declare that he doth not condemn
his other Catholic subjects for the fault of those few,
and laboureth to restrain the Puritans from that conceit;
whereby it appears they had laboured also to put that
opinion into His Majesty's head and heart against all
Catholics, if his wisdom and upright judgment had not been
the greater. <q>It resteth now (saith he) that I should shortly
inform you what is to be done hereafter upon the occasion
of this horrible and strange accident. As for your part that
are my faithful and loving subjects of all
degrees, I know that your hearts are so
burnt up with zeal in this errant, and your
tongues so ready to utter your dutiful affections, and your
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
hands and feet so bent to concur in the execution thereof
(for which, as I need not to spur you, so can I not but praise
you for the same), as it may very well be possible that the
zeal of your hearts shall make some of you in your speeches
rashly to blame such as may be innocent of this attempt;
but upon the other part I wish you to consider, that I would
be sorry that any being innocent of this practice, either
domestical or foreign, should receive blame or harm for the
same. For although it cannot be denied, that it was the only
blind superstition of their errors in religion that led them
to this desperate device; yet doth it not follow that all
professing that Romish religion were guilty of the same.
For as it is true that no other sect of heretics, not excepting
Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, no not even those of Calicut (who
adore the devil), did ever maintain by the grounds of their
religion that it was lawful or rather meritorious, as the
Romish Catholic call it, to murder Princes or people, for
quarrel of religion, &amp;c.; yet it is true on the other side, that
many honest men blinded peradventure with some opinions
of Popery (as if they be not sound in the questions of the
Real Presence, or in the number of the Sacraments, or some
such School question), yet do they either not know, or at
least not believe all the true grounds of Popery, which is
indeed the Mystery of Iniquity. And therefore do we
justly confess that many Papists, especially our forefathers,
laying their only trust upon Christ His merits at their
last breath, may be and oftentimes are saved; detesting
in that point and thinking the cruelty of Puritans worthy
of fire, that will admit no salvation to any Papist. I
therefore thus do conclude this point, that as upon the
one part many honest men seduced with some errors of
Popery may yet remain good and faithful subjects; so
upon the other part, none of those that truly know and
believe the whole grounds and School conclusions of their
doctrine, can ever prove either good Christians or good
subjects,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The first chief point of
the King's speech.</note>
These be the words of His Majesty's
speech in Parliament,<note place='foot'>Concerning his opinion of his Catholic subjects. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> wherein we may
observe two things. First, that the Puritans had laboured
and in some sort prevailed with His Majesty to make him
believe, that it is holden by the doctrine of Catholics lawful
to kill and murder Princes, &amp;c, wherein that they might the
better persuade and work His Highness' mind to their
opinion, or rather his opinion to their desire, they did set
forth two pestilent books full of subtle falsehood, one of the
which I had occasion before to write of, which was directed
to that unlawful end to prove all Catholics traitors by
the laws of the realm. The other was yet a more impudent
and malicious book, entitled <hi rend='italic'>The Popish Positions</hi>,
wherein by a number of Canons and sayings of Popes
and Doctors, falsely alleged and sophistically inferred, the
Puritans labour to prove that it is by the Catholic doctrine
holden and approved for lawful to kill and murder Princes,
&amp;c., and therefore not possible they should be good
subjects but traitors, and so to be esteemed and used. In
which case I leave it to the reader's judgment what was the
mark they shot at. But I may not leave him in that error
(if by chance he be one that know not our opinions) that
we either hold or teach so erroneous and wicked doctrine,
as they would infer out of many places which themselves
understand not, and others which they falsely allege. I
will not stand to answer any particular of the book, which
is not for this place, and shall be no doubt much better
and more at large performed by others. But this I desire
the reader to remember, that out of this very story, wherein
yet there is a sorer proof against us in this point, so far
as concerneth the only practice of a few, than can be
equalled in the examples of many ages; yet doth it plainly
appear that Catholics do hold and teach the very contrary,
as if it please him to turn back unto the answer which
Father Garnett gave unto Mr. Catesby in questions of the
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
like kind but of far less moment, he shall plainly see. For
although he was not demanded any such barbarous question
as whether it were lawful to murder Kings (unto which his
answer would have been quick and sharp no doubt, as
becometh a Religious man, whose ears must be hedged
about with thorns against any such traitorous tongues),
but the demand being only this: <q>For whom it was lawful
to make war and how far to proceed therein,</q> he showed
that no war was lawful without authority, nor any authority
able to give leave but from those that had the government
of the commonwealth. His answer therefore was much
contrary to this malicious inference of his untrue reporting
enemies, although he then spoke unto a confident friend,
where he feared no rehearsal of the matter; and to one
also that he feared to be too forward in those causes, and
therefore if he had been desirous to set him more forward
in that mind, and had been of that opinion himself, or
that opinion true and lawful to be practised, which our
enemies slander us withal, surely he would then have
delivered his mind plainly to that effect. But the truth
is so far on the contrary side, that all Catholics received
strict commandment from the See Apostolic, that in no case
they should stir or attempt anything against His Majesty
or the State, and this both from Pope Clement VIII.
of pious memory, and from Paulus V<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>tus</hi>. that now sitteth
in the Chair, who both before and since his assumption
to that supreme dignity of governing the Church of Christ,
hath showed himself most earnest to procure the quiet,
safety, and security of our Sovereign, both by liking and
allowing of the leagues that other Catholic Princes have
made with him, as also by often intimation and signification
into England both by letters and message, that
no Catholic people should go about to interrupt or
trouble the same by their impatient proceedings. This
likewise was the commandment sent from the General
of the Society and Father Persons to Father Garnett, as
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
hath been showed before. This was also Father Garnett
his practice and earnest endeavour, as may plainly be seen
in his own letters before set down; and may be seen also
in the proof and sequel of this business, sith it may plainly
appear he prevailed much with all the best sort of Catholics
in England, as his letters do also import that he hoped
he should, whereas these conspirators rising in arms, and
with protestation that they rise only for cause of religion,
unto the which they were well known to be fervently
addicted, and no light-headed or hare-brained persons, but
men known to be full of valour and of wit, and esteemed
also before this action by all that knew them well, to be
full of virtue. Yea, although divers of them were much
befriended and allied in those countries where they took
arms, and the countries also very well stored with many
Catholics of worth, yet for all this, so far had Father
Garnett prevailed with them, or rather the commandment
of His Holiness delivered by him, that none would or did
come to help them, or offer to stand for the cause in that
kind or course of forcible attempt. No, neither friends to
their persons nor friends to their religion would either
by themselves or their forces give them any help at all.
And yet they sought it earnestly, insomuch that they sent
Mr. Thomas Winter to one Catholic gentleman of a noble
house and great account, and whose daughter also his
brother, Mr. Robert Winter, had married, and yet this
gentleman being a known and constant Catholic, and a
man otherwise very stout and withal of great power in
those parts, he was so far from helping or assisting them
in any sort, that he would not so much as hear Mr. Winter
speak, but caused his gates to be shut against him. And
yet the said noble gentleman was afterwards in great
trouble and had like to have lost all his estate, which is
very great, upon presumption that he did bear some good
will unto them. So that hereby it is most apparent, how
contrary the doctrine and practice also both of Superiors
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
and subjects in Catholic religion is from that which the
Puritans did labour by their books to persuade, and it
seems His Majesty was in part wrought to believe.
</p>

<p>
But whatsoever the Catholics do herein, it is well known
that the Puritans do both hold it for sound doctrine, and are
not ashamed to teach it as lawful and necessary, and to
practise it also (not as these few Catholics did, out of their
own opinion ill-applied, and blamed for it by all of their
own side), but as proceeding out of their doctrine, yea
and warranted by the same, or rather urged upon the
people by the preachers of the said doctrine, for which
they say they bring the Word in great plenty.
</p>

<p>
I will not here cite Luther and Calvin, who are very
copious in this kind, and will be fittest for those to bring
that answer the foresaid books. It sufficeth here to consider
our home examples and that of the chief apostles and
pillars of the religion now professed under His Majesty's
name and authority in Scotland, to wit, John Knox, the
first broacher and preacher thereof, and Buchanan's chief
assistant therein, and master also and bringer up of His
Majesty's person. Both which in their
public writings do not only place the
restraint, coaction, punishment, arraignment,
condemnation, deposition, yea and
execution also of Princes in the people's
hands when they govern not well (according to their judgment),
but further also do wish that public rewards should
be appointed by the same people for such as kill tyrants,
as commonly there are, say they, for those that kill wolves
or bears or take their whelps. So they. Whereunto if we
add these authors' own inference in the same places here
quoted, which is, that when the people are negligent in
punishing evil Princes, their particular ministers may cite
them; yea, and by excommunication cast them into hell,
and make them unworthy to enjoy life upon earth, as
their own words are. By this doctrine, and by their
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
practice according to the same (whereof His Majesty is
best able to bear witness out of his own trial), the reader
may judge how different the state of Princes' safety is
under the one and the other doctrine and discipline, and
from the one and the other sort of subjects. And by this
I leave him to discern whether the Catholics or the
Puritans deserve better to be compared with Turk, Jew, or
Pagan, or the inhabitants of Calicut, in respect of cruelty
or disobedience growing out of their doctrine.
</p>

<p>
And surely His Majesty was not ignorant of the mind
and doctrine and manner of proceeding of the Puritans in
this point; but out of his wisdom, he thought it best rather
to please them for the time in seeming to believe what they
had written of us than to rehearse their own doctrine,
whereof he had tasted too much, knowing right well that
their patience was not able to bear to be rubbed upon the
back, which indeed was much galled in that kind of
doctrine about government. So that herein we may think it
pleased His Highness to practise<note place='foot'>Upon this occasion of the disobedience in these few gentlemen. <hi rend='italic'>Erased
in Orig.</hi></note> that in this his grave
and princely speech in the Parliament House, which sometimes
before he had used to say in mirth, when he would
show the difference between the Papists and Puritans, in
matter of patient sufferance. For His Majesty would often
affirm that he had in his realm two asses, an old ass and a
young ass. The old ass, which was the Papist, would
willingly and patiently bear what loads soever he laid upon
his back; but the young ass, which was the Puritan, was
so unruly, that if he laid the least burden upon his back,
he would never leave wincing and flinging until he had
gotten it off, and perhaps would do much harm in the
meantime with his heels. And we must for this time bear
with so much the more patience this imputation as a
punishment for the ill desert of these few gentlemen,
although it be most apparent that our doctrine and our
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
general practice deserve much the contrary, which also
His Majesty in the same speech doth seem to allow as
true in the minds and manners of most of his Catholic
subjects; and in that regard doth wisely and graciously
restrain the too great forwardness and fury of the Puritans,
which, he saith, he counteth worthy of fire, allowing the
Catholics neither for saved souls in Heaven, nor good
subjects in earth.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The second chief point
of the King's speech.</note>
But yet whereas His Majesty doth
distinguish between the learned and
unlearned Papists, and seemeth to think those which
know the less, and believe and follow the fewer of our
grounds and points of doctrine, to be the better sort
of Catholics, and more likely to be the better subjects
and more obedient both to God in Heaven and to their
Kings and Princes on earth: this is the second point
I touched before, which I must grant I do not well understand.
For being granted that some of our religion
be good, and God's servants, and go to heaven, I do not
see how it is possible that those who know and practise
more of that with which the others were good, can thereby
become the worse.
</p>

<p>
For as it is most assured, that none can have grace in
this life, nor glory in the next without faith&mdash;<q>sine
qua impossible est placere Deo:</q><note place='foot'><q>Without faith it is impossible to please God</q> (Hebr. xi. 6).</note> so no faith but the true
faith which Christ delivered to His Church, and the Apostles
planted in His Church, can be this necessary foundation
to this good estate of a soul either in grace or glory.
<q>Fundamentum enim aliud nemo potest ponere
praeter id quod positum est.</q><note place='foot'><q>For other foundation no man can lay but that which is laid</q>
(1 Cor. iii. 11).</note> Therefore these simpler
Catholics being saved must needs both have had faith,
and that the true faith of Christ. Now I suppose the true
faith of Christ can teach none to be disloyal. Again this
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
faith of Christ, being but one (as there is but one Lord and
one baptism), cannot be divided, or in part believed
and followed and in part refused, <q>quam nisi quisque fideliter
firmiterque crediderit, salvus esse non poterit, eamque
nisi quis integram inviolatamque servaverit, absque dubio in
æternum peribit.</q><note place='foot'><q>Which unless every one shall believe faithfully and firmly, he cannot be
saved: and unless a man shall keep it whole and inviolate, without doubt he
will perish for ever.</q></note> So that the most simple Catholics both
do and must believe and profess the same faith in all points
which the learned do, although they are not bound explicite
to know all particulars more than the articles of their
Creed and the Sacraments and other needful helps to
salvation which they are to use; for the rest it sufficeth
they believe the Church in all things as being <q>Columna
et firmamentum veritatis,</q><note place='foot'><q>The pillar and ground of the truth</q> (1 Tim. iii. 15).</note> and the same also one article
of their Creed, which all are bound both to believe and
know; and so consequently the simpler sort believe
implicite and virtually all that is generally taught and
believed by School Doctors for matter of faith: and so
their faith and the grounds of their faith being all one,
can work no different effect. And if there should be any
difference, methinks the better lot should not light to the
share of the more simple, for then it would be good to
be unskilful in the law and in the grounds of faith, contrary
to that which God saith by His Prophet, <q>Conticuit
populus meus, eo quod non habuerit scientiam:
quia tu scientiam repulisti, repellam et ego,</q><note place='foot'><q>My people have been silent because they had no knowledge; because
thou hast rejected knowledge, I will reject thee</q> (Osee iv. 6).</note> &amp;c. And this
was the ordinary cavil against us in the late alteration
of religion (though unjustly imposed), as though we had
willingly kept the people in ignorance, and therefore would
not permit them the Scriptures in English. But as reason
did then, so since experience hath proved that was not the
cause; but as nurses that feed their children, as St. Paul
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
did his, first with milk and then with solid meat, so we.
And this to prevent their danger, which since we see
hath followed, that rule being neglected under pretence,
forsooth, of remedying the ignorance which Papists were
kept in. But if then the case of the ignorant had been
the better, we had the more wrong to be blamed for doing
the best. Finally, this faith which may and often hath saved
some of the ignorant Papists; as it is but one, and must
be entirely believed and professed, so it is also holy, as
being the faith of Christ (as before I proved), and the
foundation of that Church which is <q>una et sancta,</q> &amp;c.:
and being holy it cannot follow that the greater measure
should hurt, where the less doth good; for as we see, if a
little fire give warmth, a greater will give a greater heat, and
the sun which giveth light being under a cloud, will shine
more brightly when it is fully seen: so that the more
virtue is in the agent, and the more the same is applied,
the more is the same effect brought forth in the patient,
unless it be <q>propter debilitatem organi,</q> as in our eye
against the light of the sun when we gaze upon it, which
defect is not in our soul, the same being made for God Himself
as for the final end of man, and therefore capable still
of more and more increase of grace, as we see in the
Apostles, &amp;c.; and as God saith by His Prophet, <q>Dilata
os tuum et implebo illud.</q><note place='foot'><q>Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it</q> (Ps. lxxx. 11).</note> Therefore it must needs
follow that the more and more perfectly and exactly the
rules and grounds of this holy faith are known, the more
holy it doth make the knowers and believers and followers
of the same. Neither can it possibly be otherwise; for as
our Lord Himself saith, <q>Non potest arbor bona fructus
malos facere.</q>
</p>

<p>
Well may it happen, and doth often (as His Majesty
did wisely and truly note), that <q>particular men of all
professions and religions have been, some thieves, some
murderers, some traitors,</q> &amp;c., but this then is contrary
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
to their doctrine, if their doctrine be that good Tree
of which our Saviour speaketh, and which He planted
in His Church. For that being <q>Arbor bona non
potest malos fructus facere,</q> where we must understand,
<q>quatenus talis arbor.</q> The best tree that is hath some
fruit that doth miscarry. Some are blasted in the bud,
some shaken off with the wind, some pecked with birds,
some with one mischance and some with another miscarrieth
before it come to ripeness or perfection; but by these we
never measure the goodness of the tree. But if we see
an apple or apricock hang upon the tree of perfect colour,
of just bigness and shape, so that we may see it is come
to that perfection which the tree can naturally bring it
unto, then according to the taste of the fruit, we judge
the goodness of the tree. If then the fruit be sour, we
call the tree a crab-tree; if bitter, so we also term the
tree and say it is nought; and justly, being warranted
by Him that made them, <q>Quia non potest arbor bona
fructus malos facere, nec arbor mala fructus bonos facere.</q><note place='foot'><q>A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil tree bring
forth good fruit</q> (St. Matt. vii. 18).</note>
So that here is the difference: an evil tree cannot bring
forth good fruit, that is, neither grace nor glory can grow
into a man's soul out of evil doctrine, and so that soul
not possible to be saved, unless his branch be cut from
his own root and grafted into the stock of the good tree
to receive the juice and sap of the same, as St. Paul
saith we Gentiles were into the trunk of the Jews' fruitful
olive. On the contrary part, a good tree may have some
miscarry, but then it is not long of the tree, but of
other mischances. And so the Catholic doctrine being
holy, and in this very point of obedience holy, as teaching
that all subjects are bound to obey, not
as Luther teacheth, for policy only, making all
men equal and to have no superior but Christ; nor as
I showed before out of Knox and Buchanan; but as
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
the truth is, and as St. Paul teacheth, that there is distinction
of degrees and the subjects bound to obey, and
that not <hi rend='italic'>ad libitum</hi>, or outwardly only, <q>ad oculum servientes,</q><note place='foot'><q>Not serving to the eye ... but ... as to the Lord</q> (Col. iii. 22,
23; Eph. vi. 6).</note>
but in conscience and of necessity, <q>et tanquam
Domino,</q> and as to our Lord Himself, to Whom we serve
in obeying our superiors according to His commandment.
This is the doctrine of the Holy Catholic Faith in this point,
wherein although some may miscarry and take wrong
courses, as these few of late did, following their own conceits
and desires against the direction and wills of those who
delivered the contrary doctrine (as hath been declared), yet
this is no impeachment to the Tree, nor to the rest of the
fruit. This act of theirs cannot be laid upon the doctrine
which is holy and bringeth forth no disobedient fruit,
but the contrary in great measure, and that so much the
more in those that know more and are the more perfect
in the grounds thereof, as being the fruit which this
<q>Arbor bona</q> hath brought to best perfection.
</p>

<p>
And this clearness and innocency touching this late
attempt is not only thus apparently proved to be in the
whole body of Catholics, but was then the general opinion
of all, the Puritans excepted, who are ever ready to impugn
<q>agnitam veritatem.</q> His Majesty, as you have seen, did
partly affirm it and granted some other part, out of which
you see it is convinced.
</p>

<p>
The prisoners being all at that time often and carefully
examined, they affirmed constantly and jointly (though
severally examined) that there were no other conspirators
than were taken and publicly known. And as for Priests,
they did both then and at their death protest there was
none in the action: whereupon His Majesty in the whole
course of his speech did only lay the fault upon them
that were discovered, and did seem to excuse the rest,
as you have heard. So that it was as generally, as justly
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
believed and voiced through England, that other Catholics
were all free, and no Priest at all accused or could be
touched with the treason, which gave no small satisfaction
both to Catholics and others. And so in right it should
have continued. But the Puritans did much grieve and envy
that those should be free from blame, upon whom they
rather wished that all might light. And therefore they
began to practise and work the contrary opinion, first
in the King, and afterwards in public show unto the
country, as shall appear in the next chapter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX.
How The Fathers Of The Society Were By Industry
Of The Heretics Drawn Into This Matter, To
Incense The King Against Them, And For Them
Against The Catholic Religion.</head>

<p>
The Prophet doth in few words very fully express the
desires and endeavours of such as are most guided by that
spirit of pride, who is a professed enemy to God and to all
good men. <q>Superbia eorum (saith he) qui te oderunt,
ascendit semper.</q><note place='foot'><q>The pride of them that hate Thee ascendeth continually</q> (Ps. lxxiii. 23).</note> As if he should say to Almighty
God, not only the apostate Angel himself doth hate Thee,
and all those for Thy sake whom he seeth Thee to love; but
those also, who are full of his rising and resisting spirit, do
still raise themselves against Thee and all Thine, but most
against those whom they see Thee most to favour, or most
to use and employ in Thy service. <q>Ascendit semper:</q>
their spirit still fighteth against those whom at least they
think the highest; although in this man's judgment often
erreth, guessing by outward signs and not being able to
search the heart of man, as He doth that is <q>Scrutator
cordis et renum,</q> is therefore not able to judge, or their
judgment to be taken for a certain proof, who be most in
God's favour. But this their practice was plainly proved
true in this present matter, whereof we have already treated
and are as yet further to declare. For although we are to
presume that His Majesty and the Council did proceed
without passion in the matter, His Majesty having in many
parts of his speech showed great equanimity and gracious
opinion of his faithful Catholic subjects; yea, although His
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
Highness did in the same speech correct the malice of
Puritans against all Catholics in general, and did seek to
repress their fury, which he saw so ready by word and
action to oppress all Catholics upon this occasion offered,
and to persecute the innocent multitude for the fault of a
few: yet all this would not suffice to quench or assuage
that fire (as the King did wisely observe and so express it
in his speech) <q>with which their hearts were burnt up in this
errant.</q> But as they had before determined, so they never
left labouring, until they had wrought their will, and found
out a device which they hoped would serve both to discredit
and discourage Catholics; and beginning with some of the
chiefest (as they thought), to proceed with better colour
in punishing and persecuting of the rest.
</p>

<p>
Therefore whereas they did know very well how great
esteem Catholics did generally make of the Fathers of the
Society, and how much they did all for the most part
(especially the better sort) rely upon their advice, reputing
them to be men of great learning and judgment, and chiefly
to be of approved virtue and spirit and both skill and experience
in direction of souls: at these Fathers therefore did
these Puritans resolve to level their first poisoned arrows,
drawn out of the quiver of malice and shot from the bow of
open injustice. But you must understand that this is not the
first time they have aimed at this mark. No; they have been
the men upon their eye of envy and spite hath ever been
fixed since the first coming into England of those two famous
men, Father Persons and blessed Father Campian, whose
wisdom and spiritual instructions did so settle the hearts of
Catholics in profession of their faith and whose exhortations
both private and public did so kindle the zeal of devotion
in all their minds, that the heretics might see another face
of things in the persecuted state of the English Church,
unto which afterwards being added the frequent and learned
books of the one, and the challenged and performed disputation
of the other (with all which they were convinced and
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
confounded), these were motives sufficient to set malice on
fire against them, and their Society for their sake, although
they had found no like causes in their followers. But when
they saw the like course to be continued; of exemplary
virtue in Father Edmonds,<note place='foot'>Father William Weston was known by this name.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> of wise direction for progress in
devotion in blessed Father Garnett, and of learned and
spiritual books in blessed Father Southwell; also when
they had tried the constancy of blessed Father Walpole
and others to be inflexible and not to be drawn either by
force or favour to their will, either against God's honour
or the good of their neighbours; when they found that no
one of the Society that were sent into England could ever
be wrought by them neither by torments to yield in
infirmity, nor yet by their subtle examinations to be overreached
so far, no not so much as out of simplicity to accuse
the least Catholic of his acquaintance, or so that any did
come in trouble by any undiscreet answer of theirs.
</p>

<p>
This long and sufficient trial hath made them so much
malign the men of that Society, that they have never ceased
labouring by one means or other to practise all hostility
against them, as against their chief enemies. From hence
hath proceeded the many slanders they have sought to
publish of them: from hence the many false and foul
reports in several kinds, which they by themselves have
published in books and procured the like to be done by all
others whom they could work unto their will, as namely
those of Mr. Watson's writing, which he so much repented
at his death, asking humble pardon both of God and of the
Society for the many falsehoods and slanders fathered
upon them in the same. From hence also did proceed the
disobedience of some scholars against the Fathers in the
Seminaries, secretly wrought in their minds by some
instruments which the chief of these Puritans had employed
to that end and purpose. Finally, from hence as from a
troubled fountain have flowed all the streams of disgraces
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
and disturbance and persecutions both against the Fathers
themselves, and against the places where they have been
presumed to be; yea, against all those who have been conceived
to be favourers or well-willers to them: insomuch
that in hatred of the Fathers, they would often show favour
to the places where other Priests were taken. But if the
Priest were a Jesuit, or but a friend of theirs, and one that
were known to love them and to follow some of their
spiritual courses, of which number I acknowledge myself to
be; then should they and their receivers be sure to drink
of the whip and to have <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summum jus</foreign> instead of mercy.
And as they at the first, when Seminary Priests did come in
apace and did much good, made severe laws against them,
punishing with pain of death the receivers of them, in all
which they exempted the old Queen Mary Priests, because
they saw the others, with their apostolical zeal and fervour,
to work much greater effect in the minds of men; so now
in the practice of those laws, they made a plain distinction
between all Priests and Jesuits, whom they esteemed the
greatest enemies to the proceeding and increase of heresy.
And, but howsoever that is, would to God there were a
divorce between them and heresy (unto which as yet their
minds are so much wedded) undoubtedly they should then
find they had no friends in the world more faithful, nor any
that would be more ready to serve them in the service of
God, than those whom now they hate and persecute so
much, upon a contrary supposed ground, and the same
most contrary to all truth and justice.
</p>

<p>
But their minds being in this manner settled upon their
courses, and so grounded in opinion of chief resistance in
the Fathers of the Society and by their means, they
resolved absolutely by one means or other to effect that
which they had so much desired and so many ways
laboured for. And having this opportunity of colour
offered, of this late attempt of the foresaid gentlemen, and
knowing the same to be so odious not only to His Majesty
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
and the Council, but in like manner to all the graver and
better sort of Catholics both in England and elsewhere,
they did imagine that if they could with any little show of
pretence but father this matter upon those Fathers, they
should by that means either have all, or at least some of
their desires performed against them. For if they could
not convince them to be guilty, yet because the matter was
so hateful, they hoped either in the meantime whilst the
matter were in handling and not fully cleared, to procure that
they might be called out of England (which hath long time
been a chief part of their desires) or at least to make many
Catholics both shy of them and fearful to deal with them;
whilst they by extraordinary and exquisite searching might
apprehend the most of them. Or at the least, if none of
these took effect (as thanks be to God, the contrary through
God's providence was proved true), yet they might hereupon
ground the pretence of just occasion to enact those
severe laws against Catholics, which they had determined
and prepared long before, as I showed in the former chapters.
</p>

<p>
Now therefore they began with all diligence to seek out
likely pretences for their purpose: and it was no hard
matter to find a staff to beat these dogs prepared by Christ,
the Chief Shepherd, against the wolves that seek to devour
His flock. For although they could not find in all the
several examinations and confessions of the conspirators
now in prison any little proof that they were in the Plot,
but the contrary to be averred by them all with solemn
protestation, yet they would have it suffice for a likelihood,
that divers of these gentlemen were known unto divers of
the Fathers and did sometimes come unto them for helps
in the Sacraments. But so did many hundreds besides
those gentlemen: and the Fathers dispense faithfully those
divine mysteries to all, without exception of any, if they
find them desirous and prepared, and without suspicion of
any to bear undutiful minds.<note place='foot'>To be lions within when they seem lambs without. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> And if all the acquaintance,
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
yea, or the familiar and inward friends unto these gentlemen
should have been called in suspicion, not only many other
Catholics in England, who neither are nor can be appeached
of any such matter, should be convented, but as well, many
of their own side, even some of those that sat as judges
of them in the Parliament. Briefly, a bad excuse must
stand for good, where no better can be found, and where
the matter is resolved, and the parties condemned, before
the proof can be found or the witnesses produced. But
behold one single and he but a seeming witness was found,
or rather was supposed to be found; for he also failed
them, as I shall after declare.
</p>

<p>
There was one Bates a servant to Mr. Robert Catesby,
of whom I made mention before; and this man having
been employed by his master in the whole action for provision
of powder, &amp;c., and seeing himself so far in danger
as the best, and yet not stored with so much grace and
generous mind as was needful, nor perhaps entering the
action with so seeming good motives as those gentlemen,
who protested they did it merely for service to God and
exaltation of religion; which it may be feared was not the
motive to this fellow,<note place='foot'>Bates was a very honest and devout man. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg. in another
hand.</hi></note> being but a serving-man and never
of any extraordinary capacity or devotion, but only trusty
to his master, and belike, in respect of that employed.
Therefore now when he saw his master gone, and all hopes
by him failed, it may well be this wind would make his
house to shake, if it were so built upon the sand; and
when he saw likewise the likely storm coming of death
which he was to expect, and of torments also in likelihood,
if he did not seek to please: these loe were great
temptations to the poor fellow and sufficient to toss and
bend that reed which way the wind would blow; especially
those fears being seconded with hopes of favour; which
were also promised, as shall afterwards appear in his words,
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
when he repented his frailty before his death. And so this<note place='foot'>Poor. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
fellow being earnestly urged by persons of great authority
to confess some proofs or likelihood that the Jesuits were
in this action, the poor man, of frailty and desire of life (as
afterwards himself affirmed), told them that his master and
another of those gentlemen had been not past a fortnight
before the action broke out, at a nobleman's house where
three Jesuits were, to wit, Father Henry Garnett, Father
Osmund Tesimond, and Father John Gerard. He affirmed
also that himself was sent with a letter by his master after
they were up in arms, to a house in Warwickshire, where
two of the said Jesuits were, <hi rend='italic'>vidlt.</hi>, Father Garnett and
Father Tesimond: and that Father Tesimond then went
with him to his master, who was at Mr. Winter's with the
rest of the company; but that the said Father Tesimond
staid not with them, but rode presently away; yet did
the poor fellow in his weakness yield so far as to say,
that he thought Father Tesimond did know of the Plot,
which yet he affirmed not of the other two.
</p>

<p>
This was the ground and the only foundation upon which
they built that great and slanderous calumniation against
all the Jesuits in England; whereas this was no proof
at all, but only the single conceit of one simple man, and
that only set down as a mere thought of his own head, and
but of one of the three. For as for the seeing of them all
three at my Lord Vaux's, it is certain that was not true.
For I have inquired of the matter since, and so have found
it, as I say, to be false; besides, Father Gerard in his
letters sent unto the Council in his own purgation, did
protest he had not seen that Bates of at least a twelve-month
before, and these letters were so sent, as they were
received by the Council, whilst Bates was living and in their
hands. But Bates perhaps might think it true that he was
there at that time, that being the place which was generally
supposed to be his chief abode, and so esteemed by the
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
Council themselves, as appeared by the several searches
had been made there for him, before as well as after this
false suspicion. Besides if he would be there at any
time, Bates might think it likely he would not be absent
at that time, when two aunts of the Lord Vaux that now
is, were come thither in their return from a long journey,
who had not been there together of many years before;
especially because Bates did suppose that Father Garnett,
who was the Superior of all the Society in England,
did continue with those two sisters, and was then come
with them unto the same house, as Bates did imagine, and
that Father Tesimond also did meet him there. All which
might be very likely, if Father Garnett did go along in
that journey with those devout gentlewomen; for it might
well be supposed Father Gerard would not then be missing,
but would rather be there of purpose to give his Superior
the best entertainment he could procure, and this, if it
were so, was cause sufficient, without any thought of the
other cause of meeting, which I have heard Father Gerard
himself protest, he did not so much as imagine before
the thing itself was known to all men. And as for
Mr. Catesby his being there, he was near cousin both
unto the same Lord Vaux, and his mother who kept the
house, and to those two gentlewomen whom he met there
at that time, as he had done in many other places, both
before and since this conspiracy was dreamt of. And as
for Sir Everard Digby, there was more occasion of his
being there, and there at that time (as I have since
learned), for that he was a near neighbour and a great
and tried friend unto the same Lord Vaux and his mother,
as it was very well known unto divers of the Council,
and the same also allowed of and well liked by them, with
whom he had dealt concerning the said Lord and his mother
about a match that should have been between the Lord
Chamberlain<note place='foot'>Earl of Suffolk. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> his daughter and the young Lord Vaux.
</p>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<p>
So that Sir Everard Digby had many serious occasions
to come to my Lord Vaux's; and then in particular, as I
have learned since, being come from his ancient house
and chief living which lay in Rutlandshire, from whence
he could not go unto the house<note place='foot'>Of his ordinary abode. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> where his wife and family
lay, but he must pass by the door of my Lord Vaux
his house, which also made him there an ordinary guest.
</p>

<p>
So that all this supposal had been nothing if it had
been true; and as Bates neither did nor could affirm
it to be true that the three Jesuits were there, but only
that the two gentlewomen were there, taking their sister's
house in their way at their return, and his master also,
and Sir Everard Digby met them, of which one also came
merely by chance; what the other did I know not. And
whereas I say that Bates did not affirm this of the Jesuits,
no, nor of their only being in the house, so absolutely
as he did affirm that he afterwards saw Father Garnett
and Father Tesimond in Warwickshire, shall appear in
his own words, when I set down his letter, whereof I
have the true copy.
</p>

<p>
But yet this doubtful and uncertain affirmation of
his, which, if it had been most true and certain, had
been also certain to be no proof at all or just cause
of presumption, where there were so many other causes
concurring which would have required the being of
Father Gerard in that house at that time (if that were the
place of his most residence), yet was this no cause made
cause sufficient of great trouble to that noble family. For
presently there was commission granted out for a most
severe search to be made in that house of my Lord Vaux's,
and also in another house of the said Lord's three miles
off, lest perhaps Father Gerard might be kept there in
that troublesome time. The commission was directed
to the most forward Puritans of the country, with strict
charge not only to search narrowly for the said Father,
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
but whether they found him or not, to keep possession
of the house and the keys of the rooms, until the Commissioners
should have further order from the Council.
All this and much more was performed in so strict manner
as might be. For although the Lord Vaux and his mother
were very much beloved and respected in all the country,
he being the most ancient Baron and first in place of all
the shire, and so linked to most houses of worth within
the shire that it was hard to find any man of account
therein that was not either akin or allied or a dear friend
unto their house; yet all this notwithstanding, the search
was most severe, as I have been credibly informed by
those that were present. The house was beset with at
least a hundred men, and those well appointed. The
young Lord made no resistance, as having no cause to
fear, but brought the Commissioners presently in to his
mother, who delivered unto them all the keys of her
house, and willed them to use their pleasure. They
searched for two or three days continually, and searched
with candles in cellars and several dark corners. They
searched every cabinet and box in her own closet for
letters, in hope to find some little scroll that might show
Father Gerard had been an actor in this treason, or that
she or her son had received some knowledge of it. But
they found not with all this diligence the least tittle of
advantage in the matter, insomuch that the chief man
in commission for this search (though an earnest Puritan)
yet sent a very full information unto the Council that he
had found the house most clear, the young Lord and his
mother very respective unto authority, admitting any kind
of search or inquiry that he could desire and yet very
confident in their own innocency; and that he found not
any preparation in the house for war, or any show at all
that they had the least knowledge of any such attempt
intended.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding, this information sent after full trial
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
made by search, the Council sent for the young Lord
and his mother up to London presently, where they were
both examined; the young Lord by my Lord Salisbury
alone, who cleared himself so by his answer that he was
no further restrained, but only commanded to stay in the
city of London. His mother was examined before the
whole Council, where she did clear herself fully from
all cause of suspicion in that treason, and affirmed constantly,
that although she were a firm Catholic, and so
would live and die by the grace of God, yet that fact
she did as much mislike and condemn as themselves;
and that so she had been taught by those that had care
of her soul. They urged her that she knew Father Gerard,
and had received him many times into her house. She
answered she hoped none could justly accuse her that
she had received either him or any other Priest, and
that she would not accuse herself, the same being a Penal
Law. They insisted she was bound to tell of him, for
that he was known to be a traitor and a chief plotter of
this action. She answered with serious protestation, that
she had never the least cause to think so of him (if she
did know him, as they presupposed); and said that she
had heard so much good of the man (though she did
not know him) that she would pawn her whole estate,
yea, and her life also, that he was not guilty of that Plot,
nor justly to be touched with it. Then the Council produced
a letter which she had written unto the Sheriff
of Warwickshire, her cousin, for the delivery of two Priests,
who were taken passing through the country after the
stirs were begun, which letter the sheriff had sent unto
the Council (more like a Puritan as he is, than a kinsman
as he should be). This letter, said the Lords of the
Council, being written for the delivery of Strange, the
Jesuit (now in the Tower, and since very sore tortured, as
I shall afterwards declare), and for another Priest, one
of Blackwell the Archpriest his assistants, and the same
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
also written in so earnest and effectual manner, doth
convince you to be guilty of treason in that Statute of
aiding Priests.<note place='foot'>So that you are now in the King's mercy. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> She answered that she wrote for them
indeed, and that she desired much to set them free, but
she knew them not to be Priests, but took them for
Catholic gentlemen that came sometimes to her house
as others did, and looked nothing like Priests. Then
finally, some of the Council said, that whereas she was
now in the King's mercy to live or die, she should have
her life and lose nothing of her estate, if she would
tell where Gerard the Jesuit was to be found. She
answered, she knew not; but if she did know she would
not tell it them to save her life and many lives. <q>Why
then,</q> said they, <q>Lady, you must die.</q> <q>Why then, I will
die, my Lords,</q> said she, <q>for I will never do the other.</q>
So they sent her away to prison, not to an ordinary gaol,
but to a rich Alderman's house in London, where she
was well respected, and yet kept so close that not her
own son might come to see her, only she had a gentlewoman
of her own to attend her. There were also divers
of her servants committed to several prisons, and often
and strictly examined with many menacings if they would
not confess Father Gerard to have been at the Lord Vaux
his house, but nothing could be wrung out of them. The
house in the country was all this while watched within and
without for nine or ten days together, that if Father Gerard
were still in the house hid in any secret place, he either
might be starved to death, or by famine forced to come
out. And for two or three miles round about the house
there was watch kept in the country, and all passengers
examined in desire to find the said Father, but all in vain;
for where God will protect, man's forces or policies are
frustrate, <q>et deficient scrutantes scrutinio.</q><note place='foot'>And searching they will fail in their search.</note>
</p>

<p>
Soon after this search was past, Father Gerard lying
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
secretly in another country, and understanding how
that house had been severely searched for him as
for one of this conspiracy, he thought it fit and
needful to show his innocency in the matter by a
public letter, which he performed presently, and I have
read the letter. It contained, first, some reasons why
he did seek to clear himself, and that by the way
of protestation, the matter being true and just and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
re gravi</foreign>. Then he did solemnly and seriously protest
before God and all the Court of Heaven, that he was
never privy to the matter, nor had heard so much as
one word of that Plot of Powder before the thing itself
was discovered and the knowledge thereof brought unto
him by public fame; and that his meaning was, he had
not known of it either in secret or otherwise, no, not so
much as in confession. Also he did exclude all equivocation
so far forth, that if he did in any sort equivocate in
this protestation, he did yield himself as guilty of the whole
both in the sight of God and men. Further he alleged
divers reasons why it was not likely he should know thereof,
as in respect of the badness of the matter, which he utterly
disliked and condemned, no man more. In respect of
his estate and the prohibition he had received from his
Superiors, not to meddle with any State matters at all;
and much less with any such outrageous attempt. Also,
that the Council had tried him sufficiently in those matters
in the time of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when they had him
in their hands from three years and more, often labouring
to have found him guilty, or to have him confess he
had dealt in State matters; but he was ever found clear,
insomuch that they could not produce the least word
of his writing or witness against him in all that time
of his imprisonment, nor find him guilty in the least point,
although they put him to the uttermost trials to see
whether force or favour would sooner prevail with him.
Then further in this letter he alleged, that if in Queen
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
Elizabeth's time it could not be proved he had meddled
in any matters of State, much more it was to be presumed
he would be far from dealing in this highest kind of
treason, and that against this King, for whom it was well
known his father had suffered and lost much, whereof it
pleased His Majesty to take knowledge unto his brother
at his first coming to the Crown. And lastly, he said
he was so far from ever consenting or knowing of any
such matter, that he offered freely, if either before his
taking or after,<note place='foot'>Whensoever it should please God to permit it. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> it could be proved, that ever he had
any kind of knowledge of that Plot of Powder, that then
he would freely give them leave, whensoever it should
please God to deliver him into their hands, to put him
to all the torments could be imagined, and pull one
piece of him from another, and withal that all men of
what side or sect soever should then repute him as a
perjured creature, and to have neither faith to God nor
man. This was the effect of his letter in brief, the letter
itself containing a sheet or two of paper, which letter
being published in London, did give great satisfaction
not only to Catholics (who could not easily believe such
reports of him before) but even to the Protestants themselves.
Yea, it was showed unto the King himself by an
Earl in great favour with His Majesty, and His Highness
for that time was very well satisfied therewith.
</p>

<p>
But notwithstanding this and the general opinion which
most men conceived of his innocency, and although there
were no proof at all or sufficient grounds to proceed against
any of the rest, yet such was the settled resolution of
some to bring them into the suspicion and slander of
this treason, that they proposed it unto His Majesty as
a thing very requisite, to have a public proclamation sent
forth against the Jesuits, and first to begin with these
three, meaning to bring in the rest also by degrees. The
King referred the matter unto the Council, as his manner
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
is. The cause was therefore discussed at the council-table,
and being proposed by those that were of great
authority in that place, it was not much gainsaid, at least
for two of the three. But for the third, which was Father
Gerard, it was answered by some, that there was no reason
he should be put in the number; and one Earl at
the table, being of great account both for wisdom and
learning, said that sith Gerard had so fully cleared himself
by so ample a protestation and was a gentleman, he
thought it was very hard to lay so severe a punishment
upon him, upon the single accusation of one witness,
and he but a base fellow and in fear of his life. For it
was then supposed that Bates did accuse all these three,
and perhaps so proposed also to make the matter seem
more justly grounded. But it was not so, as will appear
in the words of Bates his letter hereafter. But neither
this pious answer, nor truth itself, which I doubt not
answered for all the three in the conscience of those
that most furthered this cruel course, could anything at
all prevail against the course which was before intended,
insomuch that it was there resolved a proclamation should
presently be sent forth against those three before named.
Yea, and Father Gerard was put in the first place, as if he
had been the principal person of the three, which though
some do think to have been done only by the penner
of the proclamation in respect of his blood or kindred
in the world, which they (looking only with fleshly eyes)
make more account of than of spiritual dignities; yet sure
it was done of purpose, to make him the more odious
thereby, and to hide the want of proof which they had
against him: that when all men did see him set before
the other two, whereof one was his Superior, and the
other his ancient every way, they might the rather
think there was some great matter found out against
him. And so all men might be incensed the more
to betray him or apprehend him, for that was the chief
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
intention of the proclamation against all the three. And
to that end in the proclamation, first the names of the
persons and the nature of their supposed offence was
set down; then a subtle inducement joined with a serious
commandment unto all men to discover them and to help
to apprehend them, unto which also was annexed large
promises to those that should be found the particular
instruments of their apprehension; and lastly, a severe
protestation that whosoever should presume to be a harbourer,
maintainer, or concealer of any of them, or should
not do their best for their discovery or apprehension, that
they should hope for no mercy, but that the laws should
be most severely executed upon them, as upon persons
no less pernicious than the actors and concealers of the
main treason itself. In the end of all the three persons
were described, that they might the better be known,
by their stature, their colour, and countenance. By all
which it may appear how violent a desire of their
apprehension those had who procured the proclamation,
as the most forcible and likely means to that effect. I
pray God avert the violence of His justice from their
souls, and send them to find mercy, when this forcible
proceeding of theirs doth come to be examined. For
otherwise a dreadful doom must be expected, <q>quia
potentes potenter tormenta patientur: horrende et cito
apparebit eis,</q><note place='foot'><q>Horribly and speedily will He appear to you, for a most severe
judgment shall be for them that bear rule</q> (Wisd. vi. 6).</note> saith the wise man. I pray God they
may prevent it, before it light upon them; otherwise this
blow will hurt and wound the strikers much more than
them against whom it was intended.<note place='foot'>One thing was observed by many at that time as markable in respect of
the event, although the foresight were but casual, which was a prediction by
one of their kind of prophets, one Gresham, a man of special fame amongst
them for skill in astrology and making of almanacs, with certain predictions of
events, not only of the weather, but of other accidental matters depending
of man's free-will, and therefore far past his skill to divine of. Yet this man,
in an almanac which he had set forth for that year of 1605, had assigned for
every particular day some special event of things that should then happen.
Amongst the rest, the mark which was set upon the day of the date of this
proclamation, and in which it was published in London, was this, <q>Might
against right;</q> which, seeing it was prepared and printed before the proclamation
was thought of, it gave many cause to think that the pen of this man
was guided by a better foresight than his own, and directed to set down the
truth by the same power that could make the beast that Balaam rode upon to
reprehend his master, and afterwards caused that covetous
Prophet to bless the people of God and to foretell the truth, much against
his own inclination and the intention of his coming. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
This proclamation being published in London, it was
presently carried into all the market-towns of England
(as the custom is) to be there proclaimed, to the end
that all men taking notice of the names and the description
of the persons of these three supposed traitors, it might
be unpossible in any short time for any of them to
pass safely through any town, but that they would be
descried, discovered, and apprehended. So that they
were now to be esteemed in all human likelihood,
<q>tanquam oves occisionis,</q> like sheep designed to the
slaughter. <q>Sed ira viri justitiam Dei non
operatur;</q><note place='foot'><q>For the anger of man worketh not the justice of God</q> (St. James i. 20).</note> and whom God will protect <q>nemo potest
rapere de manu illius.</q><note place='foot'><q>No one can snatch them out of the hand of My Father</q> (St John
i. 29).</note> God provided for them such
friends as knew their innocency well, and did most willingly
adventure with them, not regarding the threats nor respecting
the promises in the proclamation of a straw. Yea,
I know where some of them refused the earnest entreaties
of some persons of great worth instantly desiring to have
had them in their houses. But they were well and safely
provided for, for insomuch that until this day two of
them were never in danger to fall into their enemies'
hands, <q>sed liberati sunt de manu Herodis et de omni
expectatione plebis Judæorum.</q><note place='foot'>They are <q>delivered out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation
of the people of the Jews</q> (Acts xii. 11).</note> And the third was
provided for sufficiently in a house of great safety, and
where he might have continued long enough without
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
danger, if he had not been by God's permission betrayed
into their hands as his Master was; <q>sed advenerat hora
ejus.</q><note place='foot'>But his hour was come.</note> And he that betrayed him for <q>Quid vultis mihi
dare?</q><note place='foot'><q>What will you give me?</q> (St. Matt. xxvi. 15).</note> had a halter for his pains, as Judas had, though
he died not desperate, as Judas did, but very penitent
for his fact, as the sequent chapters shall declare.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X.
How Father Garnett, The Superior, Was Discovered
And Taken In Worcestershire And
Brought Up To London: And Of His First
Entreaty And Examination.</head>

<p>
When all England was filled with this new rumour by
means of this proclamation, that now the Jesuits were
also found to be in the Plot of Powder, and especially
those three, who therefore were named and described
and publicly proclaimed, though Catholics did generally
believe the contrary of them, many being witnesses of their
innocency, and of their often and earnest persuasions to
peace and quietness, and to patience in this time of
persecution. And though many wise men did say in
their hearts, <q>Quam accusationem affertis adversus homines
istos?</q><note place='foot'><q>What accusation bring you against</q> these men? (St. John xviii. 29).</note> because they saw them traduced by the proclamation
in general words as heinous traitors and contrivers
of the whole Plot, and as men so proved to be by the
several examinations of the prisoners in the Tower. But
when they looked for these proofs in the examinations,
even those which were chosen out amongst the rest to
be published in print, as the chiefest and most fit for
the full discovery of the whole Plot and the plotters
of the same; and finding there no one word of any of
them, but the contrary, in that the whole course of the
matter was there seen to be carried by others there
mentioned with all particulars of their proceedings. And
hearing also by many certain reports that the prisoners
did all protest there was no Priests at all guilty of the
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
conspiracy, or that did any ways assist them therein:
these and the like reasons did make the wiser and more
reasonable sort, even of Protestants themselves, to think,
as the truth was, <q>quod ex invidiâ tradidissent eos.</q><note place='foot'><q>For envy they had delivered</q> them (St. Matt. xxvii. 18).</note>
</p>

<p>
But this was no impediment to the forcible authority of
the proclamation, which went out under the King's name.
And instead of particular accusations, it must suffice for
the present, <q>quod si non essent hi malefactores, non
tradidisset eos potestas regia;</q><note place='foot'>If they were not malefactors, the royal power would not have delivered
them up.</note> and indeed other proofs
they could have none at all against all the three neither
then nor since, although against two of them, to wit,
against Fathers Garnett and Tesimond,<note place='foot'>Greenway. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> they framed afterwards
some pretended matter in particular, much like to
that whereof their Master was accused, <q>quod subverteret
gentem et prohiberet tributum dari Cæsari:</q><note place='foot'><q>Perverting our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Cæsar</q>
(St. Luke xxiii. 2).</note> <q>Sed sufficit
discipulis ut sint sicut Magister eorum.</q><note place='foot'><q>It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master</q> (St. Matt. x. 25).</note> In the meantime
Father Garnett thought best to retire himself to a house
of great safety near unto the place where then he was,
and there meant to lie private till the heat of this
persecution were passed, and that it might be more safe
travelling towards London where he meant to settle as
he had been accustomed. The house was called Henlip,
two miles distant from the city of Worcester, and so
large and fair a house that it might be seen over great
part of the country; and indeed it was so fair and
commodious a house that it had often caused the owner
of it much trouble, being an eyesore unto some Puritans
of great wealth that were neighbours, within some miles,
and nothing so well seated; who therefore procured often
warrants to search that house in hope to find some Priest
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
there, for which the house and the whole estate of the
gentleman might be forfeited to the King, and so begged
by them that were the causers and actors of such apprehension.
But this being often essayed was never permitted
by God until this time, <q>quæ erat hora illorum et potestas
tenebrarum.</q><note place='foot'>Which was their <q>hour and the power of darkness</q> (St. Luke xxii. 53).</note>
</p>

<p>
The proclamation being published containing, besides
other persuasions, large promises to any that would
be discoverers of any of the three; it happened that
there was a gentleman called Humphrey Littleton,
then fallen into trouble for receiving and concealing Mr.
Robert Winter, one of the principal conspirators, and
Mr. Stephen Littleton, his kinsman, who had joined himself
unto the conspirators in rebellion. These two having
escaped from this Stephen Littleton his house, where the
rest of the conspirators were, some slain and some taken
(as before hath been declared), and having escaped taking
a month and more in several places where they lay hid,
did finally come to this Humphrey Littleton for harbour:
and he received them into his kinswoman's house, where
he then lay, and kept them in his own chamber, where
they were discovered and apprehended.<note place='foot'>If this be particularly set down in the former chapter, it may be here left
out. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg. in another hand.</hi></note> Humphrey Littleton
therefore being in danger of his life for having
harboured them, and seeing so large promises of favour
and rewards to those that would discover any of the three,
thought to save himself from a temporal punishment by
doing that which deserved an eternal pain, and sent up
word unto the Council, that he had been not long before at
Mr. Abington his house, called Henlip, before mentioned,
where he heard a Jesuit preach called Ouldcorne, who did
there reside for the most part, and where he thought also
Garnett was to be found.
</p>

<p>
Upon this information a warrant was presently despatched
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
into the country to Sir Henry Bromley, a
Knight, who was the next Justice of account unto
Mr. Abington's house, and who was best experienced
in searching of that house, which he had often performed
before upon less likelihood of speeding than now he carried
with him by means of this discovery, and the extraordinary
authority he had to use his pleasure. He came therefore
to the house on a Sunday morning very early, accompanied
with above a hundred men with him, armed and furnished
all <q>cum gladiis et fustibus</q><note place='foot'><q>With swords and clubs</q> (St. Matt. xxvi. 47).</note> and with guns, and all kind
of weapons, more fit for an army than an orderly search.
And beginning to beat at the gate with great importunity
to be let in presently, the Catholics within the house
soon perceiving their intention, made all the haste possible
to hide both the Priests and Church stuff, and books,
and all such persons and things as belonged to the Priests,
or might give cause of suspicion. In the meantime sending
to the gates, as the custom is, to know the cause of their
coming, and to keep them in talk with messages to and
fro, from the master or mistress of the house, all to gain
time, whilst they within were hiding all things in the
most safe secret places they had.
</p>

<p>
But Sir Henry Bromley, impatient of this delay,
caused the gates with great violence and force of men
to be broken down, which yet he could not perform in
so short a time (by reason they were very strong and
answerable to the greatness of the house) before they
within had made all safe which they would hide from
this violent invasion. The Knight being entered by force,
sent presently some principal persons with men enough
to assist each of them into all the several parts of the
house, as well to take possession of the same, as to make
stay of any persons that were suspicious, and to be sure
that nothing should then be hidden after his entry.
Himself showed unto the mistress of the house (Mr.
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
Abington himself being not then at home) his large commission
to search, and the proclamation against those
for whom he would search. She yielded to his authority,
and gave him full power to do his will. He began
after the accustomed manner, to go through all the rooms
of the house, which were many and very large; he had
with him Argus his eyes, many watchful and subtle companions,
that would spy out the least advantage or cause
of suspicion, and yet they searched and sounded every
corner in that great house till they were all weary, and
found no likelihood of finding that they came for, though
they continued the daily search, and that with double
diligence, all the whole week following. But upon Saturday
two laymen that did usually attend upon the two
Priests, and were hid in a place by themselves, being
almost starved to death, came out of their own accord.
For they had placed the Priests in another secret conveyance
where there was some provision of victuals laid
up for their sustenance a few days; but themselves were
forced to go into a place on the sudden, which though
it were safe from finding, yet had no provision at all to
eat, and, as I have heard, they had but one apple between
them in all those six or seven days. Whereupon they
thought it best to come out; and yet not that so much
to save themselves from death by famine, as for that they
perceived the resolution of the searchers to be of staying
in the house until they had either found or famished those
whom they knew to be within. Therefore these two
virtuous men being in hope that upon their taking, the
searchers would be satisfied and depart (as either thinking
them to be Priests, or that if there had been any more
to be found, they would also have been forced to come
out), this hope made them resolve to offer themselves
to their enemies' hands, to save the lives of those whom
they loved better than themselves. And their coming out
was in such manner as could endanger nothing but themselves;
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
one of the two especially, whose name was Nicholas
Owen, abounding in discretion, which was the man that
attended on Father Garnett, and is thought by all men
to have been a Brother of the Society, of whom we shall
have occasion to speak afterwards, for he suffered many
and great torments, and is now a glorious martyr.
</p>

<p>
They therefore perceiving that some of the searchers
did continually by turns watch and walk up and down
in the room where they were hidden, which was a long
and fair gallery four square, going round about the house,
they watched their time when the searchers were furthest
off, and came out so secretly and stilly, and shut the
place again so finely, that they were not one whit heard
or perceived when or where they came out, and so they
walked in the gallery towards the door, which they thought
belike to have found open. But the searchers being turned
back in their walk, and perceiving two strange men to
be there, whom they had not seen before, presently ran
unto them, and asked what they were. They answered
they were men that were in the house, and would be
content to depart if it pleased them. The others asked
whether they were Priests: they answered they were
Catholics, and that further they would not answer, being
no doubt desirous to be taken for such, the better to satisfy
the insatiable mind of those blood-suckers. Then being
asked where they had been all that while, they answered
they had hid themselves, being Catholics, to avoid taking.
And being urged to tell or show the place where, they
absolutely refused.
</p>

<p>
But the searchers knowing well that it must needs
be in the gallery by all circumstances, began afresh
to search more violently than ever, and to break down
the wainscot with which the gallery was lined, and
the walls also in a number of places. And so they
continued with all violence for five or six days after,
and leaving no place untried in so great leisure as they
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
had, it pleased God to end the misery in which they
kept those two good Fathers by their so long and strait
inclosure, and to deliver them <q>in manus quærentium
animam illorum,</q><note place='foot'>Into the hands of those that sought their life.</note> by permitting the searchers at last to
light upon the place itself, where they had been hid so
many days, <q>sustentati aquâ, angustiæ et pane tribulationis.</q><note place='foot'>Fed <q>with bread of affliction and water of distress</q> (3 Kings xxii. 27).</note>
For the Fathers were resolved (as since I have been
informed) there to have ended their days (which could
not much longer have continued, the uneasiness of the
room and their slender provision considered) rather than
by coming out to have endangered their friends in whose
house they had been so charitably entreated. But it
was God's will to have their great patience and many
virtues better known by their public sufferance of violent
death, than it could have been if they had been in that
manner privately pined up in a corner. The searchers
therefore having found and entered the secret place, they
took out the two Fathers out of their close and painful
prison, and they seized upon such Church stuff and books
as were also laid up in the same place, which had made
the room more strait and uneasy for the Fathers than
otherwise it would have been. When the Fathers were
taken, they soon knew who Father Ouldcorne was, because
he had continued in that country many years and was
well known and highly respected by most of the Catholics
in all those parts.
</p>

<p>
He had also been often seen by many heretics of the
country, and was once in their hands before in Queen
Elizabeth's time, taken on the sudden by some that came to
search the house, as he was walking with another gentleman
in the garden. But then out of his ready wit he escaped
their hands; for coming with the searchers to the door,
which went of the parlour into the garden, and finding
it locked (which it is like the servants had done after they
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
perceived the search, because they would have respite
to pull down the altar and to hide the Church stuff and
other things of peril), Father Ouldcorne, therefore, finding
this door shut, called the servants hastily, as if he did
reprehend them for keeping out the Queen's officers, and
when they came to open the door he stept in first, as if
he did continue his speech of finding fault with their
long stay, and suddenly clapt to the door upon the
searchers, leaving them shut out and in the garden with the
other gentleman; himself presently got into a secret place,
perhaps the same which now was found, though then they
could not find neither it nor the man again, though they
sought him long and with great diligence. And the like
strange escapes had happened to Father Garnett often,
though in other manner.
</p>

<p>
And so we see, that when God will protect, he can
hide a Felix between two walls, and make spiders His
workmen to cover the entry with their webs. And
again, when it is His pleasure to deliver up His servants
to their last conflicts, no secret, no hide, no defence
shall serve; but He will deliver them like sheep to
the devouring of wolves, when He hath ordained them
to so high an honour, as to suffer for His holy name,
<q>ut simul compatiantur in hoc sæculo, qui conregnaturi
sunt in futuro.</q><note place='foot'>That they may suffer together in this world, who are to reign together
in the world to come.</note> So it fell out to these two holy men,
who after they had spent so many years in the gaining
of souls, labouring both faithfully and fruitfully in God's
vineyard, so that they might say with the blessed Apostle,
<q>Bonum certamen certavimus, cursum consummavimus,
fidem servavimus:</q><note place='foot'>We <q>have fought a good fight,</q> we <q>have finished the course,</q> we
<q>have kept the faith</q> (2 Tim. iv. 7).</note> what was now remaining
but that they should be called by the just Judge to receive
<q>illam coronam justitiæ quæ reposita erat illis,</q><note place='foot'>The crown of justice which was laid up for them, and for those also who
love the coming of Christ.</note> and which
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
therefore the Apostle doth not only appropriate to himself,
but <q>iis etiam qui diligunt adventum Christi,</q> which truly
was performed by these two in great measure, as both
in their life and at their death they showed abundantly.
Thus therefore Father Garnett and Father Ouldcorne
being taken, and Father Ouldcorne soon known who he
was, they laboured much to know whether the other were
Father Garnett or no, and though they brought divers
unto him to see if they did know him, yet they could
find none for a good while that could and would discover
who he was, until at last one poor man was brought, who
had drunk too much of that cup of contradiction with which
the craft of heresy hath sought of late to infect the minds
of some of the weaker sort, thereby to divide, and so to
destroy the kingdom of faith in our country; and this
poor man, I hope rather out of simplicity than malice, took
knowledge of him, having known him before and been
beholden to him, and called him both by his own name
Garnett, and by other names that he had known him to
go by, by which he was also described in the proclamation.
And this silly man did utter it with a kind of spleen,
as seeming to hope that now the Jesuits would bear
less sway than he thought they had done. It is thought
he hoped for some favour from the Council for this his
good service unto them (though a Priest, and then a
prisoner in Worcester); but I cannot hear that he reaped
any fruit besides a wounded conscience <q>ex hâc delatione
et accusatione fratris sui;</q><note place='foot'>From this delation and accusation of his brother.</note> and Father Garnett's answer
unto him was with great mildness and charity, according
to his custom. Sir Henry Bromley now having what he
desired, presently despatched posts unto the Council with
this news, and kept the prisoners at his own house in
the meantime until he might receive further order.
</p>

<p>
Unto these foresaid prisoners, Mr. Thomas Abington,
the master of the house where they were taken, was also
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
now adjoined, who came home to his own house two days
after the search began, and was presently apprehended, that
he might be in safety if any of these supposed traitors
should chance to be taken in his house: because then by
the laws he loseth both life and living. Sir Henry Bromley
soon after receiving order from the Council to bring up
Father Garnett and Father Ouldcorne with a good guard
and strength to London, he performed presently their
commandment, and went towards London attended with
a great number of horses for the more safe custody of his
charge. But the more he conversed with Father Garnett,
the more he grew in estimation of him, and the more
he showed in all things to respect him, although the man
be otherwise a very earnest Puritan, and one of the
forwardest that way of all Worcestershire. It happened
by the way that the Minister who went with Sir Henry
Bromley as his chaplain or preacher, seeing Father Garnett
so modest and to speak so little, especially of matters
of controversy, thought belike that he had been utterly
unskilful in them, and desirous to get himself some credit
in that kind, began to provoke Father Garnett to the
combat; but Father Garnett, loth to give offence unto
any, and esteeming the example of modesty more fruitful
to a proud heretic than to contend with one so likely to
resist the known truth, did once or twice put him off
with a mild answer, showing only what the other should
believe in such a case, and forbearing to allege any further
reasons. Whereupon the heretic grew more insolent (as
their custom is), and then began in sort to triumph in
the hearing of others, which Father Garnett perceiving,
and then doubting that his good meaning would be so
easily discerned by his silence as misconstrued, without
giving further answer to the Minister, he hastened his
horse a little to overtake Sir Henry Bromley that rode
before, and told him how his Minister had divers times
provoked him to disputation, which he had purposely
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
forborne, being loth to give offence unto him in whose
custody now he was; and partly also, because he knew
such disputations to be often fruitless where there is no
judge of authority to restrain the subdued party from
entering into terms of blasphemy and such like, which himself
was not willing to hear, and therefore thought it better
in such a case to be silent. But that if it pleased Sir Henry
to hear the one and restrain the other in case it should
be offered, he then for his part was very ready to give
his Minister satisfaction to anything he would or could
propound. Sir Henry commended very much his wisdom
and government in the manner of his proceeding, and
called the Minister presently, willing him to propound
all things freely that he would, but yet with modesty.
So the Minister began to discourse after their diffuse
manner, producing many things not digested into any
good method, nor founded upon any sure grounds of
faith or learning. Father Garnett suffered him to speak
his fill, as long as he seemed to continue in one matter,
and then desired leave to speak. Then he in few words
and excellent order related the substance of all that the
other had said, and then repelled it with so substantial
grounds, and with such demonstration of learning, and that
even in those kinds which they most esteem and stand
upon, which is the Scriptures and Tongues, that it put
the Minister to silence and the Knight to great admiration,
and all the audience were so satisfied both with his
modesty and profound learning as it was reported presently
by them all over London, to the great commendation
of the good Father. But Sir Henry Bromley did
seem so greatly to admire and affect him, that he affirmed
to divers gentlemen of account, when he came to London,
that he never in his life met the like man to Mr. Garnett
either for modesty, wisdom, or learning, and that he would
kneel before the King to save his life, if he were not
found guilty of the Powder.
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<p>
When they were come to London, the two Fathers
were first committed close prisoners to the Gatehouse,
their two servants to other prisons. When Father Garnett
was carried into the prison, there stood a great number
of prisoners at the gate expecting to see him as he
passed, whom he seeing, asked aloud, <q>Is there any of
you that be in for the Catholic faith?</q> And divers
Catholics answering, <q>Yes, yes, we are Catholics, and
prisoners for our conscience,</q> <q>Then,</q> said he, <q>I am
your fellow.</q> So he was locked up in a chamber.
</p>

<p>
And it was two days after before he was examined,
whereof the reason was guessed to be in that the Council,
hearing so much fame of his virtue, gravity, and learning,
and knowing well how much he was respected by many
great persons, and esteemed also by the Ambassadors of
the Catholic Princes then residing in London, it made
them very wary, and to deliberate much how to proceed
with him, and would not call him to examination before
they had informed themselves of as much as they could
learn of his words and carriage at his taking and bringing
up to London, many of which (to our great grief and loss)
are unknown to us; for that the three that were taken and
brought up with him are all put to death, and were kept
close until their death, and the times also have been so
troublesome since, that we could not have such means as
we desire to meet and talk with those that were eyewitnesses
of many notable accidents, which we hope to do
hereafter, and to have many things brought to light which
will be greatly to God's glory and all our comfort.
</p>

<p>
The third or fourth day after Father Garnett was committed
to the Gatehouse he was sent for to be examined by
five or six of the Privy Council, at which time, as ever after,
they used him with great respect, unusual from meaner
Commissioners than the Privy Council when Priests are
examined, and especially those of the Society, whom, as
being more hated by them, they are accustomed to revile
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
with many bitter and disgraceful terms, whereof traitor is
the least. But to Father Garnett the contrary was so far
used that the Lords themselves would seldom speak unto
him but they would put off their hat, and sometimes hold
it off a good while, and they did usually call him Mr.
Garnett at every word. Of this his first examination we
have not the particular; but this only in general, that he
answered so to all their questions that he gave them great
satisfaction, and they after his departure gave him great
commendation. Yea, one of the Council said, <q>he could
not be misliked but for matter of doctrine only. As for
the Powder he was clear of it.</q> So he was sent back to the
Gatehouse for the time. But that time was very short, for
he was soon after lodged in a stronger hold and in a
straiter prison, where neither any that wished him well
could come near him to understand how he was used, and
where there wanted not instruments full of subtlety and
cruel hatred against him, who would be sure to use him far
otherwise than so mild a disposition and so worthy a man
deserved.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI.
Of Father Garnett, His Carriage To The Tower
And Subtle Usage There. Also Of The Usage
Of Fr. Ouldcorne And Nicholas Owen, Ralph,
And John Grisoll In The Same Place.</head>

<p>
The expectation of this matter touching Father Garnett
was great in every place, and the conceits of men very
diverse and their discourses different what would become
of so notable a man, being so famous for learning and
piety and modesty as that his very enemies could speak
no other but much good of him, unless they would so
apparently wrong their judgments by judging contrary to
the sight of all men. Some thought he should have
favour, because they saw him used with such respect;
some deemed it most likely they meant to permit his
friends to redeem his life, as not finding sufficient pretence
to put him to death, and therefore better to gratify some
courtier with that which would be given for his life; in
which hope I know one devout gentlewoman who offered
500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> as a fee to a courtier, that was very likely to obtain
it if that had been their intention. Others judged this
stay that was made of sending him to the Tower was but
to give such hope to Catholics, and to see who would make
suit for him in any kind; others, again, that it was done to
try his constancy first by fair means, meaning afterwards
to make trial of him by contrary usage, if that would not
serve the turn. Briefly, the general report was that he
was free from the Plot, and not to be touched with
this conspiracy, which even Protestants affirmed to be
most likely, in that he was not accused by any of the
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
conspirators, as might be easily seen in their printed
examinations, for that above all the rest would have been
printed, if by favour or force or fear it could have been
wrung out of them. Now as for Catholics, it was generally
their opinion that he was innocent, for they knew very well
he could not be guilty who had so often and so effectually
laboured to stay them from all attempts or disobedience,
though in matters of much less moment than this so cruel
intention against the Parliament House.
</p>

<p>
But whilst all London and England was full of
expectation what issue this cause would have, and every
man gave his judgment of the matter according to his
several humour and opinion, that course was taken
which was from the first intended, and he was delivered
up to the Lieutenant of the Tower, a fit instrument
for such a purpose, as being a man most pliable to
the will of those that had no will to do Father Garnett
good. And the man's mind and manner of proceeding
may be seen by his first salutation to Father Garnett when
he was brought into the Tower, for presently he began to
revile him, saying <q>he was a plotter of all treasons.</q> But
Father Garnett gave him no answer, and being demanded
why he did not answer to those accusing words, he said
<q>he was not moved with his words, for Christ his Master
had taught him by His own example to bear quietly such
contumely.</q>
</p>

<p>
His lodging and first usage there was not evil in
exterior things (supposing the condition of the place),
which doth allow no bed or any such provision to any
prisoner but such as himself doth provide from his friends
abroad; which help, until it be procured, a prisoner there
may by favour have some straw to lie upon, and that was
Father Garnett his couch until such necessaries could be
sent unto him, which in his case could hardly be procured
without danger to the senders, nor but by divers circumstances.
First he was to send to some known prisoner or
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
notorious Catholic, not as acquainted with him, but as
by request in the way of charity. Then that party did
send unto his friends, and after that it was not long in
doing, but yet all done with great circumspection, as not
doubting but all those that brought such things to that
Catholic's house that must seem to send them, would be
watched narrowly, and perhaps dogged to their home,
which is an ordinary practice in all such cases.
</p>

<p>
Being now settled in the Tower, the Council came
thither to examine him, but found him always the same
man, both constant in his faith and function, and faithful
to his friends. For though they pretended they would not
deal with him in any matter concerning his Priesthood
(desiring, indeed, to have his case esteemed different from
others against whom they had formerly proceeded), yet
were many questions such as if he had answered either
weakly or unwisely he must needs have brought many of
his friends to great trouble; as, where he had lived for a
long time, how he had been maintained, what places he was
at in that last journey, what company he had met at the
places which they affirmed he did stay in, and finally, whom
he knew or had had any dealings withal. But he quit
himself so wisely, and answered so resolutely in them all,
as did sufficiently declare he neither could lawfully, nor
would upon any condition detect others, knowing nothing
by them but the exercise of Catholic religion and practice
of virtue. Finally, there was not any whosoever of high or
low degree that came in trouble by his default or oversight.
There were also many occasions offered in those several
examinations of showing his skill and knowledge in
matters of learning. In particular for matter of equivocation,
wherein he was much and often urged, and ever
gave them such satisfaction as in reason they could
wish no more. The particulars of divers such-like
things we cannot as yet procure, they are kept so close
(as commonly it is most done where they find least
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
advantage); only that matter of equivocation being spoken
of again at the bar by Mr. Attorney,<note place='foot'>Who must needs have a fling at it, because his place was not to speak
much before, when the Council did examine him. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> then he referred to
the former full satisfaction he had given them in his
several examinations, though there again he repeated some
points thereof briefly, as shall appear when we come to
handle his arraignment.
</p>

<p>
The Council, finding that no advantage was to be
gotten of him in his examinations, either against himself
or others in this chief matter, they committed the care and
charge of proceeding with him in that kind unto the Lord
Chief Justice and the Attorney-General, to wit, Popham
and Coke, both professed enemies to Catholics and their
religion, who were so forward or rather so desirous to
undertake the business, that (as it is said) they offered, if
they might have their full scope to deal with him as they
thought good, they would undertake to prove him guilty in
the Plot of Powder. I pray God, that of the Prophet David
be not proved against them both, <q>Veloces pedes eorum
ad effundendum sanguinem,</q><note place='foot'><q>Their feet are swift to shed blood</q> (Psalm xiii. 3).</note> when they shall be cited to a
higher Tribunal, where neither the one shall plead nor the
other be judge, but both be judged <q>secundum mensuram
quâ mensi fuerint.</q><note place='foot'>According to the measure they have meted.</note>
</p>

<p>
Father Garnett was delivered over to their pleasure,<note place='foot'>As Job to the accusing enemy, to persecute by bloody interrogations and
other vexations also, as they should find it needful, reserving his life. <hi rend='italic'>Erased
in Orig.</hi></note>
and it pleased them to examine him very often. In
all which, though they found no advantage at all, yet,
after three or four examinations, they were so bold as
to give it out that he had confessed all. But this was
for another end. For hereupon presently the Attorney
spake in the Parliament House to have eight Jesuits
condemned of this treason by the High Court of Parliament,
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
<hi rend='italic'>vidlt.</hi>, Garnett, Hall, Greenway, Gerard, Hamon,
Westmoreland (there being no such of the Society),
Cresswell, and Baldwin. But the Parliament refused to
condemn these men without better proof of their being
guilty, and therefore willed the Attorney (seeing he had
Garnett's examinations) to lay down the next day the
proofs before them, which he promised to do in so clear
manner as their lordships should rest satisfied of their
guiltiness, and that by Garnett's own confession. At the
time appointed he brings his proofs, which all proved no
confession of Father Garnett (as he had promised), and
indeed nothing else but mere conjectures, imaginations,
and inferences of his own, and that with so little colour of
likely truth as no man applauded the motion, although
there were very many that were no friends to the
parties accused (to speak the least), and so Mr. Attorney
his motion died, and was never after revived. Yea, a
nobleman coming from the Parliament at that time, said
to his friend, that these lawyers were so accustomed to
lie that they could say truth in no place. But indeed
Mr. Attorney must be excused for this time, the cause and
case being very particular and a thing much sought for
and long desired; and if it could have been thus huddled
up without further examination, that so many of the
Society might have stood convicted by Act of Parliament,
it would have been (as they well hoped) a stain of record
to the whole Society. But it pleased God otherwise to
afflict and exercise his servants at that time <q>et infatuavit
Deus consilium Achitophel.</q><note place='foot'>And God infatuated <q>the counsel of Achitophel</q> (2 Kings xv. 31).</note> I wish him from my heart a
better end than Achitophel had, though his device and
advice in this matter was of like malice. There were
also some questions sent unto Father Garnett from the
Parliament itself, and he answered to all their demands by
writing in such sort as gave good satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
The Chief Justice and Attorney, in the meantime, did
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
often visit Father Garnett, but not in that manner that they
may expect to hear for their labour, <q>In carcere eram
et visitastis Me.</q><note place='foot'><q>I was in prison and you came to Me</q> (St. Matt. xxv. 36).</note> They did daily vex him with subtle
examinations and cruel interrogations, but finding they
could win nothing by these means, they devised, by
treacherous stratagems, to discover the secrets of his
heart, if any were concealed by him of which they might
take advantage. And to this end caused the keeper that
had particular charge to keep his prison close and surely
locked, and who alone was admitted to come unto him and
to bring him his meat and other necessaries which he
wanted. This man was directed to feign himself much
moved with Father Garnett his behaviour and words (as,
indeed, they were sufficient to move a better and wiser man
than him that had not been without grace), and to pretend
that he began to be much inclined and almost won to the
Catholic faith, and, in the meantime, to show himself very
friendly, and promise to be faithful to Father Garnett in
anything wherein he might do him service. And the
fellow was so cunning in this art of cozenage, and set so
fair a gilt upon his copper, that the good Father, being full
of charity, <q>quæ omnia credit et omnia sperat,</q><note place='foot'><q>Which believeth all things, hopeth all things</q> (1 Cor. xiii. 7).</note> did hope
the best of his mind, though he meant not to trust him so
far as might greatly endanger either himself or others until
he had better trial. But yet he made use of his offer so
far as to send by him some notes of ordinary matters
(as the fellow might think); first unto a prisoner in the
Gatehouse, a virtuous Priest and his kinsman of his own
name, unto whom he sent a short letter concerning some
necessaries that he wanted, which letter being written with
ordinary ink, he wrote besides in the margent and in the
free parts of the paper some other things with the juice of
orange, which could not be seen without holding to the
fire, and would not have been suspected if the letter had
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
only by casualty come to light. But this faithless
messenger, opposing his malice to the Father's charity,
carried the letter presently to be scanned, which imported
(besides the writing in black) a brief relation of the Father's
estate, the effect of his examination, and that he was so
clear of the Powder that the same could not be proved
against him. When this letter was thus read by warming
at the fire, because it could not then be delivered to the
Priest, they therefore counterfeited the Father's hand
and sent it to Mr. Garnett in the Gatehouse, to deceive
him also and to make him to return answer to the Father,
that so he might think himself secure, and be emboldened
to commit yet further trust unto this false messenger.<note place='foot'>This letter was so cunningly counterfeited that it could not be distinguished
from Fr. Garnett his own hand, and it was signed also and so licensed to pass
with the lieutenant his brand unto it. Yet all such necessaries as the Father
writ for and the other sent were seized upon by the Lieutenant, and the Priest
himself brought after in great trouble for returning this charitable answer.
<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Then the Father, knowing how great care his friends
abroad had of him, hoped he might use this man in like
manner unto Mrs. Ann Vaux, a noble gentlewoman, and
aunt unto the Baron I had occasion to speak of in
the former chapters, who had for a long time showed great
devotion and charity, serving Christ in His servants, much
like, in her intended course, to those holy women of
Matt. 27. whom the Evangelist speaketh, <q>Quæ secutæ
sunt Jesum a Galilæa ministrantes ei.</q><note place='foot'><q>Who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto Him</q> (St. Matt.
xxvii. 55).</note> This gentlewoman,
out of her great and faithful charity to Father Garnett,
followed him, indeed, not only when she might with liberty
enjoy the comfort of his spiritual and fatherly counsel, but
also with great constancy and an undaunted mind, seeking
by all means possible how she might assist him in his
troubles. She therefore, being most desirous to perform
all friendly offices to Father Garnett, and, as charity is
ever more careful of another's want than fearful of their
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
own danger, and more solicitous to provide for the one
than to prevent the other: understanding that Mr. Garnett
in the Gatehouse had received a letter safely (as it was
thought) by the means of this keeper, she procured to
speak with the man, and finding by all outward signs that
he did much affect the good Father (whom she well knew
to deserve so much affection), she thought she might be
bold to send unto her good Father by him. And so
she did, desiring to know what he wanted, and what
she might perform to procure him any comfort. So
that under hope of this safe means there passed divers
letters between them by this keeper, all which were
first delivered by him to those that had employed him in
that bad office; who procured the letters to be so finely
counterfeited, that being delivered they were received on
both sides for the true hands of the first writers. And so
their trust was deceived on both sides, and their letters
sent by so false a messenger were continually read, which
they thought had passed so safely. By which train they
afterwards entrapped the gentlewoman and bred her
trouble, as I will declare in his place.
</p>

<p>
But in the meantime, finding nothing by all this
that might touch Father Garnett in that degree which
they most desired (there passing nothing in those
letters but either spiritual comforts from the good
Father, or relation of his estate and examinations, and
how he would have some matters disposed of which
belonged to his charge, and which he had not means
before to give order for, in respect of the late great
troubles which had happened); therefore, this not succeeding
as yet to their full desire, though they kept this still
on foot, yet they invented and put in practice another
subtle craft, so much further from suspicion as it was
nearer home, where the Father might to his thinking
freely speak unto his friend without fear that his words
should come to scanning, which letters are often subject unto.
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The hole in the wall where the
FFrs. were overheard.</note>
To this end they placed Father
Ouldcorne in a chamber near unto
Father Garnett. And one time this sly companion
and cunning or rather cozening keeper, making show
of great love to Father Garnett, told him there was
a thing wherein he knew the Father would take great
comfort, and which he would be willing to grant (as
desiring to do him any service), but that he durst never
as yet tell him of it, least it should be espied by others,
and then he was undone. And this was, forsooth, that he
might at some convenient times come to speak with
Father Ouldcorne; and that he would willingly grant them
both this favour, so that Father Garnett would promise
never to disclose it, and give the like charge unto Father
Ouldcorne. This being promised, the fellow showed Father
Garnett the way unto the wall of Father Ouldcorne's
chamber, wherein there was a cleft by which they might
well speak together and hear one the other, if they did
speak of any loudness. This was accepted by both the
Fathers as a great courtesy; as indeed it is no small
comfort in such a place to men of their quality, if this
honey had not been stuffed with too much gall. But this
dogged fellow dogged them so closely, as they could never
meet but he would be of the council, though unseen by
them; for the place was purposely so contrived as that the
sound of their words must needs be carried to another
place not far off, where this keeper would stand and some
other with him, to have a double witness in their double
dealing. Whereupon it happened not long after that these
two Fathers, thinking themselves secure in this point, took
some fit time (as they thought) to have each other's help
in the Sacrament of Confession. And after they had
ended their spiritual business, they began to confer of
each other's estate, demanding what had been asked
and what answered in the times of their examinations.
Amongst other things, Father Ouldcorne demanding of
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Father Garnett whether Mr. Winter's going into Spain
and his negotiation there were not laid to his charge,
to this the Father answered, <q>He could answer that well
enough, for after that time he had the King's general
pardon at the time of his coming to the crown, that
other business with Spain being in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth.</q> Then Father Ouldcorne also demanded
whether he were not pressed with this matter of the
Powder Treason, as being a likely thing they would
urge that above all other matters against him. Father
Garnett answered, that <q>so they did; but that they
could prove no such matter against him, and that
no man living could touch him in that matter, but
one.</q> This, lo, was the word that afterwards bred him
so much trouble, and others of his friends so much
grief, until by his public answers he had cleared their
doubts, and by his death put the matter out of doubt,
that he was not to be charged with any crime in the
matter of that treason, but that there was one man
alone that could accuse him so far forth as might give
a likely pretence to their laws to proceed against him,
especially his enemies being his judges, and they not
judged or ruled by the law of conscience, in which the
Father was clear. This word, as the rest also, was overheard
by the keeper and another easing-dropper, his
companion in that listening and cony-catching office. Then
they thought they had enough. This was carried with
all speed unto the Council, with no small joy; as it was
foretold by Christ should befall his followers. <q>Mundus
gaudebit, vos vero contristabimini.</q><note place='foot'><q>The world shall rejoice and you shall be made sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy ... and your joy no man shall take from
you</q> (St. John xvi. 20, 22).</note> But this lot is not
ever to lie on their side; for He that permits this to His
servants for a time, hath promised also <q>quod tristitia
vestra vertetur in gaudium,</q> and then <q>gaudium vestrum
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
nemo toilet a vobis.</q> Then shall be verified, <q>Væ vobis
qui ridetis nunc, quia flebitis,</q><note place='foot'><q>Woe to you that now laugh, for you shall mourn and weep</q> (St. Luke vi. 25).</note> and that with fruitless and
yet everlasting tears. God grant they may see and shun
the danger, which is far greater and more to be feared
than that which did or could befall this good Father by
this seeming misfortune. But to proceed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The trouble of Mrs. Ann Vaux.</note>
Then it was resolved presently, that either by fear
or force they would wring out of him who this person
was that only could accuse him, and how far he could
be accused. Then they resolved also to pull off the
vizard from the dissembling face of the false keeper,
and that he should no more show his former readiness to
please or pleasure the good Father; but only that he
should bring the good gentlewoman into the snare, which
he had before drawn her into by his faithless promising,
which he performed in this manner. Finding the devout
gentlewoman desirous to see her
good Father at the window of his prison, he promised
to satisfy her wishes therein, and appointed a time
when she should come to the Tower privately, and he
would carry her to a place where she should at the
least see him, if not speak with him. She failed not
of her time; but coming thither found such signs and
causes of distrust, that she returned sooner than she
had intended, and was followed by persons prepared for
the purpose, to see whither she would go to take her
lodging, thereby not only to bring her, but her friends also
in question. The gentlewoman, perceiving herself to be
dogged, would not go to her own lodging nor to any
Catholic house; but wisely intended to have gone into the
prison of Newgate, where there was great store of Priests
and other Catholics, unto which many of all sorts had
continual access. Thus far they let her pass quietly, but
when they saw she intended to go no further, they
presently staid her, and with some rough usage carried her
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
back unto the Tower, from whence she came, and there
committed her prisoner, which is a very unwonted place
for women to be committed in. But her extraordinary
zeal towards her good Father deserved this extraordinary
honour of being thereby more noted and spoken of, by this
confession both of her faith and fervour, which was so
much the more honourable as the confession was more
public, and that was so much the more, as the place was
more eminent where she was imprisoned.
</p>

<p>
Presently after her imprisonment, there were many
false rumours spread and slanders raised, according to
their custom in such cases (where they desire most
to obscure the most known virtues and best deserving
persons) for it was reported in many mouths that
Father Garnett was married to this gentlewoman, and
such like stuff, which forsooth they would have therefore
the rather believed in that she was forward to
adventure for him, and to go to see a man in so great
danger as he was: not understanding how much more
force true charity hath than fond affection, but <q>Animalis
homo non percipit ea quæ Dei sunt.</q><note place='foot'><q>The sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of the Spirit of
God</q> (1 Cor. ii. 14).</note> And they measure
others by their own desires, not feeling any spark of that
heat which moved so many good Maries to follow Christ
and His Apostles, nor tasting any part of their comfort,
who ministering corporal food unto their spiritual Pastors,
receive also from God by their ministration that heavenly
manna <q>quod nemo novit nisi qui accipit.</q><note place='foot'>Which no man knoweth but he who receiveth it.</note> But those
reports soon died, when they saw her sober and modest
behaviour, giving very good example and as great edification
by her carriage as she did satisfaction by her
answers in all the time of her imprisonment, never
relenting or repenting the forward zeal she had showed to
help her good Father in his need; but rather contrary, that
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
she should as willingly bestow her life as her labour to do
God service in that kind. And so my Lord of Salisbury
did give her testimony at Father Garnett's arraignment.
</p>

<p>
About this time also was Mr. Garnett, the Priest in the
Gatehouse, brought into further trouble for the letter he
had received by the treacherous keeper, although it was
signed and so licensed with the Lieutenant his hand, who
had also, notwithstanding this leave given, seized upon all
such necessaries as were then sent unto Father Garnett by
this good Priest, and he was now also called into question
about the whole matter, and strictly examined, and so
removed from the Gatehouse to the Tower, where he
remained in likely expectation both of torture and death
for his charity shown to Father Garnett, to whom no man
could show any friendship, and be withal esteemed
<q>amicus Cæsaris.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then the Council appointed a set time of coming
to the Tower to examine Father Garnett upon this
advantage they had by cunning won of him out of his
own words. There came thither to that end the Lord
of Salisbury, the Lord of Suffolk, the Lord Northampton
and others. How Father Garnett had been used in
the meantime for his preparation to this business we
cannot learn, but we have cause to think it was not so well
at this time especially, as he out of his modesty was
content to affirm of his usage in general, being asked the
question at his arraignment. For when he was brought
before the Lords, he was in a very strange plight, so
thirsty as not able to spit or speak; beer was called for,
and he drank two glasses before them; withal he was
so drowsy, as not able to hold up his head; he complaining
that he had not slept in five nights before. It
was reported by divers of good intelligence in London, that
he was watched of purpose and kept from sleep to make
his head light, and himself less able to bear that which
should be imposed upon him; also that he had some
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
mixtures of intoxicating drink given him which should
obscure his understanding and distemper his body. But
in respect that Father Garnett being asked the question
in public, did not take knowledge of any extraordinary
hard usage in those kinds, I for my part do rather think
it was done, but in such manner as himself could not
perceive, by mixing his drink or meat with such confections
as might work both those effects to distemper his
body and hinder his sleep, and yet the Father not know
when or how it was procured.
</p>

<p>
At this time he was so heavy in his head, that being
not fit to be examined, the Lords permitted him to go
sleep an hour, and then being awaked, he was brought
unto them again, but was little better. Then they did
examine him of many things concerning the Powder
Treason, and particularly seemed to take knowledge that
one had confessed something of him in that kind, and
asked seriously whether there were not some one that
could accuse him therein: which he confidently denied as
thinking himself as secure from being accused in the
knowledge of the matter as he was in conscience clear
from all consent or approbation of the thing itself. When
they saw him so absolute in denying this point, they
carried him to the house of torture and there did torture
him for some time; it is thought not very long.<note place='foot'>But the time we cannot certainly learn. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> For then
they opened the whole secret, how he had been overheard
speak at the hole in the wall with Father Ouldcorne, and
that he said, there was one man that could accuse him, of
which words they produced two witnesses that said they
heard him speak them; and how many more were brought
in we know not. But Father Garnett then seeing his trust
deceived and the matter discovered, thought it best for
divers reasons not to stand in it any longer; but said that
<q>in tantâ nube testium,</q><note place='foot'>In so great a cloud of witnesses.</note> he would utter the matter justly as
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
it was, that being the time wherein he might lawfully do
it, and before he could not: the knowledge that he had
being a secret committed to him in confession, which the
penitent did only license him to utter, to save himself
from torture, but not in any other case.
</p>

<p>
Then being taken down from the torture, he was
demanded, how far he was of counsel or a furtherer of the
Plot of Powder. He answered he was never any furtherer
of it, but did ever both mislike it in his heart, and in what
he could did hinder it. And being asked how it was, or by
whom he might then be accused; he answered that he
could not be otherwise accused of it, but that he had only
a simple knowledge of it, and that also in so secret a
manner as that it was never lawful for him to utter it,
being in confession. They asked him how it came to be
more lawful now to utter it than before. He said, in
respect that now he had leave granted by the penitent,
who had licensed him to utter it, rather than endure
torture for keeping his confession secret. And being urged
by some of the Lords, why it might be lawful to utter the
secret of confession to save himself from torture, and not
lawful to utter it for the saving of so many great persons
from death, &amp;c, he answered it was lawful in neither case,
but by the license of the penitent, who only could <q>dilatare</q>
or <q>restringere sigillum secreti,</q><note place='foot'>To enlarge or restrain the seal of the secret.</note> which appertained to
himself. Being then required to tell who that party was; he
answered, they should see, he would deal plainly with them
in all things, it being now lawful to utter his knowledge
therein; and said, <q>the man was Father Oswald Tesimond.</q>
</p>

<p>
This acknowledgment of Father Garnett's was after
censured by many; and even by some of his friends and
well-wishers esteemed a weakness in him. But if the causes
that moved him thereunto be well weighed (as they were no
doubt very well considered by him) the matter will not be
found to deserve any imputation of fear or imprudence in
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
Father Garnett. For after it was once bolted out at the
hole in the wall that he was to be accused of it (which
thing indeed made the overture to all) if he had then
insisted upon denial, that would neither have saved his
life, nor his estimation touching that matter; yea rather, it
would have left him suspected of further practice as a
principal plotter of the matter, and withal would have
made all the rest of his true assertions the more distrusted.
Whereas by telling the plain truth, that he only heard it in
confession, he did both show himself and the party from
whom he heard it to be free from being either principals or
parties in the action, especially declaring unto them as he
did how the matter passed, to wit, that Father Tesimond
came unto him much troubled about the matter, desiring
for the ease of his conscience to go to confession, and
therein declared, that such an intention and practice was
opened unto him; wherein he might have some doubt
whether he had done his duty. For though (as I have heard
it affirmed by some of credit, that since have spoken with
Father Tesimond) he did utterly mislike the practice, and
refuse to assist them any way, either by counsel or otherwise,
yet doubts or scruples fit for confession might arise in
his mind two divers ways. First, on the one side he might
be doubtful whether he had sufficiently dissuaded them
from it, and used the best and most effectual reasons to
withdraw them from proceeding therein, both in respect of
the matter itself and of the charge he had from his
Superiors not to meddle with any matter of State, much
less of that quality that concerned the life of any, or
attempts against the Prince. So on the other side, he
might have some motions to doubt whether in that case<note place='foot'>Being no causer of it himself, he should not have left them to themselves
without seeking to divert them from their purpose; not knowing whether.
<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
God did not intend by them to punish heresy and revenge
the cause and quarrel of his servants with a temporal
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
affliction to some of their chiefest afflictors, which he knew
well would be much more severely punished in the next
world if it be not repented in this. Therefore being
uncertain of the secret judgments of God, and seeing them
so resolute in it, and to protest they did it only for the
redeeming of the Church from persecution in England
and like danger in other places, if the root of heresy
should continue; but especially that they did it to save
so many souls as daily were cast away, whilst heresy was in
that strength and power, against which also, they said, no
other means was left in human likelihood by which they
could hope redress of so many evils, much greater without
comparison than the loss of such as were to perish in the
action. Remembering therefore the reasons they alleged,
though he was sure he might not himself be an actor or
furtherer thereof in any kind, yet perhaps he might doubt
how far he was bound to hinder it in others. And so the
matter on both sides might breed some doubts, and
whether he feared he had done too much, or too little, in
the cause, yet his fear on either side might be cause
sufficient of confession;<note place='foot'>And the confession being only of his knowledge what others had opened
unto him of their intentions so long time after they had begun the practice.
<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and his confession a sign that he
rather disliked than approved the Plot in any sort. For
either he must confess that he had hindered it or not.
If that he had hindered it, then he was no furtherer of it;
if that he had not hindered it sufficiently, then it was
apparent he misliked the Plot, and meant to hinder it.
But the truth indeed was (as I have heard it) that he had
sought to hinder it by persuasion; but was doubtful
whether in so earnest and effectual manner as might be
likely to prevail with so absolute resolutions.
</p>

<p>
Father Garnett, therefore, opening the plain truth of
the matter according to the leave he had of the penitent in
that case, did not any way prejudice, but rather relieve,
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
both his own and his penitent's case as things then stood.
But some will say, what needed Father Garnett have
opened the name of the party, and not rather indefinitely
have affirmed that some one in confession did open it
unto him. But this (if it be well considered) would not
have served. For, first, if he had named no person, he
could never have taken away the fear and jealousy of the
King and State, knowing assuredly that one man yet lived
that was privy to the matter, and for ought they knew
might be still in the same mind, and live in place, or be of
power, to effect some mischief. Besides, by such concealment,
he might fear great troubles would follow to many
Catholics, especially that all the friends of the Society
would have been troubled with continual examinations,
searches, and vexations; and that his particular acquaintance
should assuredly have been suspected, imprisoned,
and convented before the Council as traitors under this
pretence; and so to save one man from trouble he should
have been the cause of trouble to many, besides his own
extremity of torture, which would have been with all force
and fury laid upon him until he had told the truth. And
to name any other person living, it was not lawful, because
not true; and to name one of the gentlemen that were
slain would not have been sufficient, he having said that
one man living might accuse him. And to name in
particular Father Tesimond did not seem to give any just
cause of increase to the hard opinion they had of him
before, knowing by Mr. Winter of his going into Spain
with him (though they mistook the cause) and by Bates<note place='foot'>Of his knowledge thereof from him, and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> of
his going unto the gentlemen in Warwickshire after they
were up in arms, though there also they misinterpret his
intention. But this supposed, and he thereby as much
laid for and as likely to suffer (if he were taken) by their
former conceits, as by this one particular, this circumstance
of his uttering it in confession might rather extenuate than
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
aggravate his peril in just reason and the opinion conceived
of him. For as I showed before, it proved a dislike of the
action, or an endeavour against it, or both, and this before
his confession. Then Father Garnett adding thereunto his
further charge, that he should do his uttermost to dissuade
and divert them from their purpose, and he promising to do
his best, all these points do prove sufficiently that he was
neither contriver nor counsellor, nor yet consenter to the
Plot, of all which he stood then accused in the proclamation,
so that the knowledge of the truth might seem to
help and not to hinder him in anything.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>All others of the Society apparently
cleared from any knowledge of
the Plot.</note>
These and many more effectual reasons no doubt were
considered by Father Garnett, which moved him not to
conceal the whole truth of his knowledge, and the means
how it came unto him; which cannot therefore be justly
imputed to any frailty or imprudence in him, but rather
esteemed as an argument of his care to take away
jealousies from the King, who could not fear any further
power or practice in Father Tesimond; to prevent troubles
from Catholics; to free himself and the other also from
opinion of any consent unto the Plot; but especially to
clear all the rest of the Society
from so much as the least knowledge
that any such thing was intended. Which truth
may evidently be proved out of Father Garnett's words,
<q>That one only could accuse him of his knowledge
thereof;</q> for if any more of the Society had known thereof,
it is certain they would and must have confessed the same
to him, if they took it for a fault; if otherwise, at least
have sought his advice out of confession. So that no more
imparting the matter to him, it was apparent no more
did know of it; and therefore very likely to be God's
especial providence that Father Garnett should be overheard
to speak these words unto his confident friend in private
(whereby it was most apparent he meant not to be heard
by others), that thereby all others might be cleared; though
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
for the time it occasioned his further trouble, which God
doth often permit to His elected servants, for their further
increase of glory in another world.
</p>

<p>
This, therefore, Father Garnett acknowledged then in
his examination before the Council, that they might see,
as he told them, he dealt truly and plainly with them in
all things. And they asking him why he did not before
acknowledge so much, but did protest against it, he
answered it was not before lawful for him to do it, because
he had no leave but in that case; and that it was a thing
both lawful in all laws, divine and human, and ordinary also
in their own practice, for men to plead not guilty, until
they be convicted by witness, which he especially might do
in this case, this being no sin or crime in him, and was bound
to do until this time, it being before <q>sigillum secreti confessionis,</q><note place='foot'>The seal of the secret of confession.</note>
which now was released by the penitent's leave.
</p>

<p>
So they left Father Garnett for the time; but
carried with them matter enough, as they thought, to
convict him of this treason in show of the world. To
which end it was presently given out through the whole
town, that he had confessed all, and now they could
prove the Jesuits to be principal plotters of this treason,
and him and Greenway to be chief authors and devisers
of the same; and it was in most men's mouths that
all this was under Garnett's hand confessed. And this
presently carried unto the Ambassadors there residing,
that by them it might be divulged in others States; and
so a falsehood first grounded, might be more hard to be
removed by sequent information of the truth, and their
proceedings against Father Garnett might seem more justifiable.
This report, although it troubled the Catholics of
England much until they knew the contrary, yet could they
not believe it, being so well acquainted with the giving out
of such things, as the chiefest do desire to have believed,
although the truth be often found on the contrary side.
</p>

<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>

<p>
In the meantime Father Ouldcorne was also called in
further question about this conference and about his
knowledge of the treason; but they found him always
like himself, both virtuous and wise and constant in both,
and as, indeed, he knew nothing thereof, so he ever
professed his absolute innocency therein and patiently
endured the extreme torments they
put him unto, as I have heard five hours every day, four
or five days together, which was a greater extremity than
one will easily believe that hath not tried it.
</p>

<p>
Likewise one that did attend upon Father Ouldcorne,
and did assist him in his journeys and many good works
when he was at liberty, did now suffer with him, as he
afterwards died with him. His name was
Ralph &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;;<note place='foot'>Ralph Ashley, for eight years Father Ouldcorne's servant, is believed,
like Nicholas Owen, to have been a Lay-brother of the Society.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> and he was divers times put upon the torture;
but the certain number or measure of the times I cannot
yet learn. But he patiently and constantly endured all
without revealing any one place or person of his master's
acquaintance.
</p>

<p>
But, above all, they were most troubled and tormented
that were known most to belong unto Father Garnett;
of which kind they had first taken one John Grissold, an
honest faithful man, who had the
keeping of a house where the foresaid
Mrs. Ann Vaux and a kinswoman of hers did use to
dwell near unto London, and where they imagined
Father Garnett did also remain with them. This honest
man being taken in the beginning of the troubles, was
first committed close prisoner to the Gatehouse and
there lodged in a dungeon upon the bare ground, for
the keeper (though he were earnestly entreated by the
other prisoners) would not allow him so much as
straw to lie upon, pretending that if he had any straw
to lie on, he would with that set fire on the house. This
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
man did both endure his affliction with great patience and
answer in all his examinations with great constancy and
fidelity. But afterwards, when Father Garnett was taken
and prisoner in the Tower, the Commissioners desiring to
get matter against him, removed this man to the Tower
also, and there put him to the torture with great extremity
and very often, almost every day for a long time together,
as we did confidently hear reported; with which and with
other bad usage in his diet and lodging, he was for a long
time after like to die, and it was thought by many that
he was dead, and doubtless he escaped very hardly.
</p>

<p>
But the man that was most extremely
used and with extremities brought unto
the last extremity, which is death itself, was one Nicholas
Oven, commonly called and most known by the
name of Little John. By which name he was so famous
and so much esteemed by all Catholics, especially
those of the better sort, that few in England, either
Priests or others, were of more credit. This man did
for seventeen or eighteen<note place='foot'>18 or 19. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> years continually attend upon
Father Garnett, and assist him in many occasions. But
his chief employment was in making of secret places
to hide Priests and Church stuff in from the fury of
searches; in which kind he was so skilful both to devise
and frame the places in the best manner, and his help
therein desired in so many places, that I verily think no
man can be said to have done more good of all those that
laboured in the English vineyard. For, first, he was the
immediate occasion of saving the lives of many hundreds
of persons, both ecclesiastical and secular, and of the
estates also of these seculars, which had been lost and
forfeited many times over if the Priests had been taken
in their houses; of which some have escaped, not once
but many times, in several searches that have come to the
same house, and sometimes five or six Priests together at
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
the same time. Myself have been one of the seven that
have escaped that danger at one time in a secret place
of his making. How many Priests then may we think
this man did save by his endeavours in the space of
seventeen years, having laboured in all shires and in the
chiefest Catholic houses of England? Then for spiritual
good, it is to be noted he was partner with them all in
the gain of souls wherein he did preserve them; and to
which end he intended directly all his works, labouring
in that painful and dangerous business to keep them in
safety for the saving of souls, which it appeared well he
respected more than his own body, for he was not ignorant
that his office was much subject to the danger of spies,
and that when he should happen to be taken he was sure
to be extremely handled to wrest out of him the secrets
of other men's houses. And so, <hi rend='italic'>de facto</hi>, he did prove
it ten years before this his last apprehension, at which
time being taken with Father Gerard, though it were not
known directly that he was the man that used to make
secret places, neither the time as then all out so violent
(things passing much with us by storms and calms, as in
times of former persecution), yet was he then put to
extreme torture, and used besides with all cunning to
see if either force or fear would make him to relent. But
when they found that he was so constant he would not
yield in the least point, and so discreet withal that they
could not take any advantage of his answers either against
himself or others, having no evidence at all nor witness to
come in against him, they could do no more but keep
him still in prison, which they did until Catholics, that
could hardly want him abroad, with a good round sum
of money did purchase his liberty.
</p>

<p>
One reason that made him so much desired by
Catholics of account, who might have had other workmen
enough to make conveyances in their houses, was
a known and tried care he had of secrecy, not only
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
from such as would of malice be inquisitive, but from
all others to whom it belonged not to know; in which
he was so careful that you should never hear him
speak of any houses or places where he had made such
hides, though sometimes he had occasion to discourse of
the fashion of them for the making of others. Yea, he
did much strive to make them of several fashions in several
places, that one being taken might give no light to the
discovery of another. Wherein he had no doubt great
aid from Almighty God, for his places were exceeding
fortunate (if so we may term the providence of God),
and no marvel, for he ever began his work with communicating
that day he entered upon it, and, as much
as his labour would give him leave, did continually pray
whilst he was working. But the contriving of his works
in the safest manner were also very much assisted by an
extraordinary wit and discretion which he had in such
measure as I have seldom in my life seen the like in a
man of his quality, which is also the opinion of most that
did know him well. But, above all, that which did most
commend him both in the sight of God and man, was
his innocent life and earnest practice of solid virtues. For
the first it was such, that I think no man can say that
in all that seventeen or eighteen years they heard him
swear by any oath, or ever saw him out of charity; yea,
I have heard his ghostly Fathers affirm very seriously,
that in all that time they never knew him to have committed
mortal sin, nor anything that might be doubted
to be such. His practice of the chiefest virtues was such
that he had gotten great habits both in the religious
virtues of poverty, chastity, and obedience, and no less
in humility, patience, and charity, which upon all occasions
were very plainly seen in his conversation and actions,
insomuch that he was as a pattern of those virtues in every
house where he came. One trial of his patience I cannot
omit, because it was most apparent and worthy memory.
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
He was sent on a time to London by his Superior to fetch
certain household stuff behind him upon a horse that was
somewhat resty. He loaded his horse in an inn, and
afterwards got up in the saddle with great difficulty; but
then the horse would not forward, whether misliking his
load or no, it is uncertain; but instead of going forward
he rose so high with his forefeet that he fell backward and
fell upon the man and burst his leg; which sore hurt he
did bear with so great patience, and in like sort the
dressing thereof divers times, but especially when being
false knit, it was needful to have it broken the second
which was worse than the first, that they all admired him
in the inn, where he was forced to lie a long time. And
whereas his friends were much afraid he would there have
been discovered in his long abode, yet his patience and
virtue got him so much love that he received no harm,
but was ever after most welcome to the place.
</p>

<p>
Upon this hurt and the ill-setting of the leg-bone, one
leg was a little bended and shorter than the other, whereof
he had some halt, but so little as you could scarcely discern
it; wherein, as he was made somewhat like in his pace unto
blessed Father Ignatius (whose child and scholar he was),
so did he labour to follow his steps in his Rules and holy
Institution, whereof he was a most religious observer, and
as we generally think a Lay-coadjutor of the Society,
admitted by Father Garnett some years before his death,
though his humble and discreet carriage was such as you
could not discern any liberty of fellowlike conversation
that he took thereupon with any of the Society, but rather
carried himself in all things as a servant. And I have
some reasons more in particulars to think that he was
assuredly admitted of the Order, yet those can better tell
that are of the Society here in England.
</p>

<p>
Now to come to the manner of his death. It was
such as might be expected from so innocent and holy a
life; yea, such as the enemy did therefore much malign
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
and to seek to hide, and that with disgrace in all he
might. Being taken with Father Garnett, as hath been
said, he was first committed to the Marshalsea, and not
close prisoner of purpose (as it is thought) to observe
who would come unto him; but he was too wise to give
any advantage. When Father Garnett was committed
to the Tower, he also was sent thither, there to be tortured,
and that with all extremity, as it was before intended
when he was first known to be taken; for even then a
chief Councillor said, <q>Is he taken that knows all the secret
places? I am very glad of that. We will have a trick for
him.</q> And so indeed they tricked him when they had
him in the Tower, for they tortured him so long and so
often that his bowels gushed out together with his life;
which when they did espy, thinking to cover their own
cruelty with his slander, they gave it out that he had
slain himself with a knife that was lent him to eat his
meat withal. And to make this report to go for current
amongst the common people, they set forth a ballad with
his picture, ripping out his own bowels with a knife as he
lay in bed, his keeper being also in the chamber busy
about some other thing. But this false slander was so
improbable that even his enemies did not believe it, much
less his friends that were so well acquainted with his
innocent life and long-continued practice in virtue, besides
his former tried constancy in that kind. For all men did
see it stood with no likelihood that, after all his torments
so patiently sustained, he should then of impatience or
fear of more torments cast away himself; for then he
would rather have done it before his torments, or after the
first time to prevent the next, for he was beforehand well
assured they meant to use him with all extremity; and
yet all the while he was in the Marshalsea, or where his
carriage might be seen, no sign of fear or trouble of mind
could be discerned, but an humble and quiet settled mind,
using great diligence in prayer, as one that prepared
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
himself to his last conflict, which he might well expect,
especially knowing the state of his body, as he did, which
I will by-and-bye declare. Again, if he would have yielded
to sin to save himself from pain, would he not rather have
yielded to their desires and discovered the secret places
that he knew, for which he might be well assured not only
to escape torments, but to be most highly rewarded, as one
that could have done them more service in that kind than
any man in England whosoever, and might have brought
more Priests into their hands and more gentlemen's and
noblemen's livings into their possession than any one man
could; yea, he might have made it almost an impossible
thing for Priests to escape, knowing the residences of most
Priests in England, and of all those of the Society, whom
he might have taken as partridges in a net, knowing all
their secret places which himself had made, and the
like conveyances in most of the chief Catholics' houses in
England, and the means and manner how all such places
were to be found, though made by others. So that as no
one man did more good than he in assisting the labours
of all the Priests that were workmen in that vineyard, so no
ten men could have done so much harm as he alone might
if he had been so disposed; by which he well knew he
might have made himself great in the world, not only by
their rewards for so great and extraordinary service, but
also by the spoil of Catholics' goods, being so many and
so great, as he might have come to the rifling of, and have
had no doubt much thereof for his own share, especially
the Church stuff, which he knew to be very rich in some
places, and where and how it was laid up. These motives
therefore of riches, credit, and pleasure, being joined with
assurance of life and liberty, had been more likely baits
for him to have bitten at, if he would have swallowed the
hook of sin for the avoiding of torment, than by the
torment of death voluntarily assumed, not to end his
torments, as he well knew, but to begin a never-ending
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
and that also much more intolerable torment in hell-fire. He
wanted neither wit nor knowledge in spiritual things to
discern the great difference between these two; especially
seeing on the one side with pleasures and riches in the
world to be joined a longer life, and so a time wherein he
might at last hope to do penance and be saved. Whereas
on the other side he could see nothing but present death
without comfort, and that but <q>initium dolorum,</q><note place='foot'><q>The beginnings of sorrows</q> (St. Matt. xxiv. 8).</note> the door,
as it were, into the house of horror, despair, and everlasting
torments.
</p>

<p>
No; the truth was this: the man had lived a saintly
life, and his death was answerable, and he a glorious
martyr of extraordinary merit. God assisted him with so
much grace that in all his torments he gave not the least
sign of relenting, not any sign of impatience, not any one
word by which the least of his acquaintance either did or
might come in any trouble, of which three kinds they could
not so much as feign any little instance to set forth with
their forged slander, but set out the bare lie without any
colour or likelihood at all. Indeed, I think they intended
not to have killed him by torture, though they meant to
give him enough, and more than ever any sustained of
whom we can find records. For he hung in the torture
seven hours together, and this divers times, though we
cannot as yet learn the certain number, but day after day
we heard of his being carried to torments. Now true it is,
and well known to many, that the man had a rupture in
his belly, taken with excessive pains in his former labours;
and a man in that case is so unable to abide torments, that
the civil law doth forbid to torture any man that is broken.
He, therefore, being not only tortured, but that with so
much extremity and so long continuance, it could not be
otherwise but that his bowels should come out; which,
when they perceived, and minding as yet to continue that
course with him, they girded his belly with a plate of iron
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
to keep in his bowels, but the extremity of pain (which is
most, in that kind of torment, about the breast and belly)
did force out his guts, and so the iron did serve but to cut
and wound his body, which, perhaps, did afterwards put
them in mind to give it out that he had ripped his belly
with a knife. Which, besides all the former reasons, is in
itself improbable, if not impossible. For first, in that case,
knives are not allowed, but only in time of meat, whilst
one stands by, and those such as are broad at the point,
and will only cut towards the midst. And if one be sore
tortured (though much less than he was), he is not able to
handle that knife neither for many days, but his keeper
must cut his meat for him. But his particular case proceeded
yet further, for his weakness was such that when a
kinswoman of his (to whom they sent for some relief for
him) desired to see by his handwriting what he would have,
his keeper answered, <q>What would you have him write?
He is not able to put on his own cap: no, not to feed
himself, but I am forced to feed him.</q> This man was likely,
then, belike, to do such a deed with a knife which he was
not able to grasp. But afterwards, the same party, seeking
further to know his estate, and coming to the keeper to
learn, as desirous to help him with anything that was
needful, he secretly wished her to trouble herself no more,
for, said he, <q>The man is dead, he died in our hands.</q>
This was known presently to divers Catholics, though
reported in private, as it was spoken, for fear of further
examination and trouble. For after they had published
that he had killed himself, and seeing it was not believed,
the only argument they had to give it credit was to
commit those to prison that spake against it, of which
there were divers examples to terrify others. <q>Sed Deus
revelabit abscondita tenebrarum et manifestabit consilia
cordium.</q><note place='foot'>But God <q>will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts</q> (1 Cor. iv. 5).</note> And of this great and worthy martyr there is no
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
question but many witnesses will one day be produced to
the glory of God and His servant, and the safety of their
own souls if ever they come to penance. In the meantime
I desire my soul may have part with his, and myself may
be assisted with his holy prayers. About whose life and
death I have been the longer, to show how much the truth
of his virtuous life and glorious death is contrary to the
published slander. This happy soul suffering all this, only
for his conscience and constant practice of charity, not
being so much as accused of any other crime.<note place='foot'>Now I must set down their proceedings by course of law against the
gentlemen that were the conspirators in the treason (of which I formerly
treated), and this I will do in this chapter following. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII.
Of The Arraignment, Condemnation, And Execution
Of The Conspirators, With The Full Clearing
Of Some Of The Society Falsely Accused In
This Arraignment.</head>

<p>
About<note place='foot'>This great diligence and often iterated examinations of Father Garnett
continued so long that it was almost the end of March before they could bring
matters to that pass which hath been declared, and so that they might have any
little show to prove the Father guilty against the laws of the realm for his only
concealing of that which by the laws of God he could not reveal. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in
Orig.</hi></note> this time was discovered unto the Council the
place where Father Garnett was, insomuch as they gave
present order for his apprehension, as I will declare in the
next chapter; but it could not be so soon effected as it
was hoped and desired, so that in the meantime, although
they were most desirous to defer the execution of the
conspirators as long as might be, coveting to have found
matter in Father Garnett whereby he might have been
joined to them as a party at least, if not a principal
contriver and author of their plot, yet finding his apprehension
not to be speedy, and having no proofs and therefore
weak hopes of proving him guilty, they could not well
defer the trial of the conspirators so long time. Therefore
upon the &mdash;<note place='foot'>The 27th.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> of January, they were all carried from
the Tower to Westminster Hall by water, being nine in
number: <hi rend='italic'>vidlt.</hi>, Sir Everard Digby, Knight, Mr. Robert
Winter, Esquire, Mr. Ambrose Rokewood, Esquire, Mr.
John Grant, Esquire, Mr. Thomas Winter, and Mr. John
Winter, brothers unto Robert Winter, Mr. Guido Faulks,
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
Mr. Robert Keyes, and Thomas Bates, servant to Mr.
Robert Catesby, of all which mention hath been made in
the precedent chapters, sufficient both to declare the
quality and conditions of each one of them, unto which I
remit the careful reader, if he be desirous to renew his
memory and to join the consideration of their life with the
inspection of their death.
</p>

<p>
Being brought to Westminster Hall before the Court
was ready to sit, they were staid some half-hour in the
Star Chamber, where in that little time of stay all men did
note a great resolution in them, not seeming to fear or
respect either judgment or death itself; nor showing any
sign of sorrow for their attempt, in regard of their intention
thereby to have pulled down heresy and set up the
Catholic religion. Their state of mind and manner of
carriage may in part be discerned by that printed
pamphlet, which was presently set forth, entitled <hi rend='italic'>A true
report of the Imprisonment, Arraignment, and Death of the
late Traitors</hi>, wherein although all their particular words
and actions were of set purpose left out, which might
sound to their commendation, and many words of contumely
and disgrace heaped upon them and their religion
also in the most odious manner that could be devised; yet
even that which is there set down of them did confirm
very many in opinion that they thought themselves clear
from offence to God in the matter, and that they were
thereby made the more willing to suffer for the same cause.
For there it is set down <q>that they spake little but in
commendation of their conceited religion; also, that they
asked no mercy either of God or the King for their
offence, but seemed as though in their conscience they
thought the work to be meritorious; also, that some did
seem to enforce a stern look, as if they would fear death
with a frown; also, that they did only pray by the dozens
upon their beads.</q> Thus they scoff at the iteration of the
<hi rend='italic'>Ave Maria</hi> and the set number of them which Catholics use
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
in saying their beads. But by all these it appears they were
nothing daunted with that which they expected, but were
well persuaded of their cause, although they knew it was
and would be condemned by the world. All which I do
the rather set down, as well for the verity of the story, as
that all men may see how needful it is even for the best
minds to follow counsel, although their intentions be never
so direct; seeing men of so excellent parts ran into so
foul an error, and attempted so dangerous an enterprise
against the whole State, by their own rash and heady
courses, against the advice of their spiritual guides. For if
they would have followed the advice of Father Garnett,
they had never fallen into this grievous disorder.
</p>

<p>
When the Court was set, they were all brought into the
hall and placed upon the scaffold at the bar to answer to
their indictments. And, first, their indictments were read,
wherein, as the manner is, their whole designment was
laid open, together with the names and number of the
conspirators, and the beginning and prosecution of the
whole Plot, in such order as hath been before declared
out of their confessions, only now they intermixed
many untruths devised of their own head against the
Jesuits, accusing them without any instance of time or
place, and without any proof or witness at all, not only as
parties of the conspiracy, but as principal actors, yea, and
authors of the whole Plot. And to this end they did name
those three as principal, whom they had before put in the
proclamation, <hi rend='italic'>vidlt.</hi>, Garnett, Tesimond,<note place='foot'>Greeneway. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and Gerard; yet
always adding unto them <q>and other Jesuits,</q> whereby it
is apparent they meant by degrees to bring in the whole
Company, having no proof against any, more than evil will
suggested. For this was before they came to know that
Father Garnett and Father Tesimond were acquainted with
it in that secret manner that they could not reveal it,<note place='foot'>As in the last chapter hath been declared. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> at
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
which time both they dissuaded it, and by all lawful means
did labour to hinder it. But here both they and Father
Gerard by name, and other also without name, were accused
of it, who never had the least knowledge or imagination of
such a matter. And yet to make the matter good against
them, here they were accused in this indictment, where
none of them were present to answer for themselves; and
were joined with the conspirators who were sure to be
convicted and condemned of the fact, that the Jesuits might
also seem to stand convicted and proved guilty with them;
and this not only as partners, but, as I have said, as principal
counsellors and causers of the whole treason. To which
end they brought in in the indictment certain solemn
meetings and consultations between the aforesaid three
Jesuits<note place='foot'>And with divers others. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and the principal of these gentlemen, especially
Catesby, Winter, Percy, Faulks, and Wright; at which
time these Jesuits (said the indictment) did persuade those
gentlemen that the King being an heretic stood excommunicate,
and therefore might be deposed, and finally
persuaded them that there was no better way to effect
that and restore Catholic religion than to blow up the
Parliament House with gunpowder. All this was there
fathered upon the Jesuits, whereof there was no one word
true, as hath already and shall hereafter more apparently
be showed.
</p>

<p>
And first, the prisoners unto this indictment did all
plead not guilty, which though it be an ordinary course for
all to do, until they have answered for themselves what
they can, and then be cast by the verdict of the jury, yet
in their case it was thought strange; they having all
confessed the fact before in their several examinations. It
was asked therefore afterwards of Mr. Guido Faulks, how
he could plead not guilty, being so apparently taken in the
place where the powder was laid up, and with matches and
instruments about him for the purpose he intended, and
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
seeing that also he never denied the fact nor the intention;
but had confessed himself privy to the whole designment
and of the most secret counsel from the beginning. It was
much marvelled, therefore, how he amongst all the rest
could plead not guilty; unto which he answered that he
granted all to be true which they now spake of himself;
but that he pleaded not guilty to the indictment, in regard
of the meetings and consultations there alleged between
the Jesuits and them, of which he said he knew nothing
nor ever heard of any such counsel or persuasion from
them. Now unto this his speech, which did so clearly
discharge the Jesuits from all the imposed crime, what
answer, think you, was given? Truly a very poor one.
Forsooth, that all that was put in for form of law, because
it must be presupposed.
</p>

<p>
But must untruths be presupposed in the place of
justice, where right and truth stand to be tried from
faults and falsehood, as gold and brass distinguished
by the touchstone? And if some consultations must
for form sake be set down before the acts themselves
be said to be concluded of or commenced, yet must
the innocent needs be thrust into the number and
made the principals in the parley? Let us suppose
the indictment had been drawn by some lawyers that
had been no good friends to the Chief Justice and
Attorney and Solicitor there present, and that their
three names had been put into the indictment instead
of the three Jesuits there named, and the whole matter
laid upon their counsel and persuasion; would this have
seemed to them to be just dealing and fit for the place of
justice, only for that such consultations must be presupposed?
Well, the time must come (and God knoweth
how soon) when they and all that were the compilers
of that indictment shall stand at the bar in a higher
court, where their indictment will also be read, being
already written by themselves in these their actions,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
<q>Eadem enim mensura, quâ mensi fuerint, remetietur
eis.</q><note place='foot'>For with the same measure with which they shall have meted, it shall be
measured to them again.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Attorney his Speech.</note>
But to proceed in the narration. When the indictment
was read, and they all pleaded not guilty, then according
to the custom in such cases, the King's Serjeant-at-Law
(whose name was Sir Edward Philips) endeavoured to
lay open the indictment that the cause of those that
stood indicted might seem the more odious unto the
jury and all the standers-by. After
him Sir Edward Coke, the King's Attorney-General, began
his speech, wherein first he laboured to excuse the long
stay that had been made of that trial and arraignment of
the conspirators, which he supposed many did marvel to
see so long deferred, supposing the grievousness of their
fact and the apparent evidence that was to be brought
against them. For excuse whereof he alleged divers reasons
which some of the standers-by thought very insufficient; as,
namely, that Mr. Robert Winter and Mr. Stephen Littleton
were not long before taken. But what if it had been some
months after before they had been apprehended (as it might
well have been if by accident they had not been discovered),
should then the execution have been deferred until their
taking? Also he alleged, that if they had made more
haste, they might have hanged Johnson instead of Faulks.
But that had been a small matter, they being sure of the
same man, and he of his punishment, which would have
been neither greater nor less to him if he had received it
by a wrong name. If Johnson and Faulks had been two
several men, and then one hanged for the other, such a
mistaking of the men or matter had been indeed an error,
and to be prevented with some longer stay. But Mr.
Attorney did not allege that which was the chief cause of
this stay of execution, to wit, an earnest desire to have
brought the Jesuits upon the stage if they could have
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
been proved guilty, as they did their names into the indictment
without any proof at all; yea, contrary to the
published examinations and the now public witness of the
conspirators themselves, as there it appeared. Secondly,
Mr. Attorney did seek to excuse himself to foreign Princes
in that he was forced to produce their names in that odious
action, which he said he would not otherwise have done,
but that he was enforced thereunto by the confessions of
the conspirators, which he was to urge against them, and
said he, the names of foreign Princes were so woven into
the matter by their confessions, that they could not
conveniently be left out. In all which I must allow of
Mr. Attorney his modesty and care not to offend so great
persons, who, though they were named, yet in no sort
accused by any of the conspirators.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Father Gerard false accused
and fully cleared.</note>
But here in defence of the innocent, we have cause to
demand of Mr. Attorney why he was not also careful to
forbear the offence of a much higher Majesty, that is, of
God Himself, by accusing His servants wrongfully, without
any cause at all given by them, or occasion offered by the
confession of the conspirators, in which they were not so
much as named? Yet Mr. Attorney would needs enforce
those meetings and consultations to be true which the
indictment had mentioned, and which, you heard before,
the conspirators disclaimed, and in respect thereof did all
plead not guilty: although for their own part, they denied
not the fact, nor the consultations which they had amongst
themselves before they concluded of the matter. Mr.
Attorney, notwithstanding, would
needs insist in the same disproved
falsehood, and added thereunto another most egregious
untruth, never so much as thought of by the party accused,
as he hath often and most seriously protested to his
private and confident friends, and once in my own hearing.
The tale is this: that Father Gerard did give the oath of
secrecy and perseverance in this treason unto the conspirators,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
and then heard their confessions and ministered
the Blessed Sacrament unto them. Than which a more
false and pernicious slander could not be raised or reported
of any man living, nor more contrary to his very natural
disposition and known manner of proceeding, as all men
will answer for him that are much conversant with him.
</p>

<p>
But I would ask Mr. Attorney upon what ground he
did raise and report this false surmise? Did any one man
ever accuse him of it, or could it be justly gathered by any
little word or tittle of their confessions? They are printed
and published, and I have them now by me whilst I write
this. I have often read them over, and my eyes are not of
so quick a sight as to discern the least cause of surmise
leading to any such matter. But perhaps Mr. Attorney
had it by revelation. Certainly he neither had nor brought
any proof at all of so foul an accusation, which had been
requisite to a man of his place. And it had been well he
would have considered for his own credit that which all
men know, that if there had been any such thing confessed
by the conspirators, without which he could never know it,
infallibly it would have been set down in their confessions;
which I prove apparently by this reason: Mr. Attorney
here affirmeth that he was forced to speak of other Princes,
because their names were so intermixed or woven (as he
termeth it) into their confessions, that he could not declare
the one without the other. If then that which he saith he
was so unwilling to speak of was publicly set down in their
printed confessions, because they were annexed by the
examinates to the discourse of their said confessions, how
much more would this against a Jesuit have been left in
(which here they charged him withal)<note place='foot'>And namely Fr. Gerard. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> if any such thing
had been true, or confessed for such by the conspirators?
I hope Mr. Attorney will not say that he suppressed the
matter for good-will unto him, and was more loth to have
his name spoken of in so odious a cause than the names of
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
those Princes which he would so fain have concealed, but
that he could not unweave their confessions so much, into
which they were inserted.
</p>

<p>
But if you will indeed know the true reason why this
absurd fiction was not set down in their printed confessions,
and yet was here averred by Mr. Attorney, you must
understand that the author of that first relation and
discourse of all this treason and of the course and proceeding
thereof (wherein the treason itself of gunpowder,
the discovery thereof, the rebellion of the conspirators,
their apprehension, and their confessions, were all published
with all known, due, and true circumstances) was so careful
of his authority and the credit of his narration, that he
would not blemish the same with reporting any known
untruth. And indeed the author was said to be of no less
authority than the King himself; as it is easy to be
gathered out of another book set forth soon after by the
Earl of Salisbury, entitled <hi rend='italic'>An Answer to certain Scandalous
Papers</hi>, in which, he saith, speaking of that discourse,
<q>that every line discovered where Apelles' hand hath
been.</q> Now, on the other side, Mr. Attorney being not so
sure a friend to truth, nor so careful of his own credit in
that point, did not stick to allege this dream or device of
his own for a true narrative, than which there never was a
more foul untruth devised, the party accused being no more
privy unto the giving or taking of any such oath, nor to
any such plot or purpose in any one of the conspirators
than the Attorney himself was, or whosoever doth think
himself the furthest from it. And so it may appear
that others of greater authority and judgment than Mr.
Attorney were persuaded of him. For although when the
matter first broke out the Council perhaps might have
some suspicion that he was privy unto the Plot, in respect
he was supposed to be acquainted with some of the
gentlemen that were in the conspiracy, and thereupon his
name put in the proclamation, yet after the conspirators
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
were taken, and had been examined, and no proof at all
found against him, or mention made of him in any of their
confessions, it seems that the wisest, and those that had
most to deal in the matter, did hold him free; and therefore
neither the Earl of Salisbury nor of Northampton did
produce any such accusation against him, although in their
several speeches they had often occasion to mention that
matter of the oath taken by the conspirators (which oath,
as Mr. Winter directly saith in his confession,<note place='foot'>Related in that discourse set forth by His Majesty, as I said before, was
concluded of amongst themselves and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> was taken by
themselves being alone and private in a chamber):<note place='foot'>And that after they went into another chamber to confess and to receive
the Blessed Sacrament: so that it appears most evidently by His Majesty's
own narration of the conspirators their confessions that Mr. Attorney did that
public audience speak <emph>or</emph> deliver, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig. The following passage
in the text from</hi> For these be the words <hi rend='italic'>to</hi> he doth not know <hi rend='italic'>are in the margin of the Orig.</hi></note> for
these be the words of Mr. Winter's confession related in
the foresaid discourse of the whole treason set forth by
His Majesty himself, as before hath been declared.
<q>First,</q> saith Mr. Thomas Winter, <q>Mr. Percy said unto
Mr. Catesby and myself, <q>Shall we always, gentlemen,
talk and never do anything?</q> Then Mr. Catesby took
him aside and had speech about somewhat to be done; so
as first we might all take an oath of secrecy, which we
resolved within two or three days to do. So as there we
met, Mr. Catesby, Mr. Percy, Mr. John Wright, Mr. Guy
Faulks, and myself; and having upon a Primer given each
other the oath of secrecy in a chamber where no other
body was, we went after into the next room and heard
Mass and received the Blessed Sacrament upon the same.
Then did Mr. Catesby disclose to Mr. Percy, and I together
with Jack Wright tell to Mr. Faulks, the business for which
we took this oath, which they both approved; and then
was Mr. Percy sent to take the house, where the mine was
to be begun,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Here it is most apparent, that in this great business
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
they consulted only with themselves; they took the oath
by themselves; they imparted the matter amongst themselves;
and assented unto it of themselves; and did admit
neither counsel, nor persuasion, nor presence of any other
in talking of the same. As for their hearing Mass and
receiving the Blessed Sacrament, who seeth not but that
might be done, and the Priest not privy to the matter?
Whereof they made no scruple at all, as appears by their
present receiving, but esteemed the case and cause meritorious
and not belonging to confession. And yet who
that Priest was, I have heard Father Gerard protest upon
his soul and salvation that he doth not know. This
confession of Mr. Thomas Winter is likewise approved in
the confession of Mr. Faulks related also in the same
discourse of this late intended treason, and contradicted
by none. But we must pardon Mr. Attorney this overlashing
in this his discourse, which seemed rather to be
intended against the Jesuits, than to prove the prisoners
guilty that were there present before him; for it appeared
by his words in divers places, that the chief mark he shot
at was, like another Aman, to root out the whole Order of
them, not out of England only, but out of the world, if he
could; for to that end he compared them with the Order
of the Templars, which was suppressed by the See
Apostolic. To that end it pleased him, out of his too
great liberty of speech, to accuse them of teaching damned
heresies, and besides, that they approve for lawful and
meritorious the killing of Kings. In which last point, to
show his good-will as well to the Head as to the members,
he joined them with the Pope himself, affirming that Pope
Sixtus V<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>tus</hi> did not only allow of the fact of that Dominican
who killed the King of France, but did highly commend
the same in a public oration in his Consistory. No marvel
therefore if Mr. Attorney did pass the bounds of justice in
his reports of those three Jesuits, and had no regard of
truth in that fiction of his own fathered upon Father Gerard
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
in particular, sith he showed so great a malice against the
whole Order in general, and was so bold as to accuse the
Pope himself in that public place, contrary to the rule of
modesty in his speech, which himself had before acknowledged
to be needful; and contrary to the counsel that is
given in such cases, that at least his memory should be
good, if his words were not true. But for the further
convincing of that fiction, and full clearing of Father
Gerard, I will afterwards briefly set down what course he
held, to show his innocency both from that and all other
participation in this treason.
</p>

<p>
Now to proceed to Mr. Attorney his speech. He endeavoured
to lay open the foulness of the treason intended,
with all the parts and circumstances thereof; and showed
how great harm and ruin might have come to the commonwealth
by their rash and unnatural attempt. Yet for the
persons of those that were the conspirators, whereof some
were slain and most of them were present, he said, <q>though
some reported them to be persons of mean account, yet,</q>
said he, <q>not to wrong them, they are gentlemen of good
houses and of excellent parts, howsoever most perniciously
seduced, corrupted, and Jesuited</q> (this was his phrase), <q>of
very competent fortunes and estates;</q> besides he named
three that were of very noble houses. But the most of
his speech was directly or indirectly still bent against the
Jesuits, as the men most maligned by him, and that, in
respect of their religion and the industry they use to
promote the same, for other matter he had not there, which
he could with any justice or truth allege against them.
</p>

<p>
When it came to the prisoners' turn to answer for
themselves, although they had pleaded not guilty, as
I said before, that was partly in respect of those conferences
between the Jesuits and them, which were not
true and therefore by them denied; partly also for that
although they acknowledged the fact, yet they accounted
themselves not guilty of any crime in the sight of God,
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
<note place='margin'>The speech of the prisoners
at the bar.</note>
Whom they sought to serve and please in the action, and
would not for any other respect have attempted it. To
this effect answered Mr. Robert
Winter and his brother Thomas, the
elder of which, though he were known to be a man
both wise and stout, yet he said but little in that
place, as it is thought, for that he saw it was in vain
to justify the action, and yet he would not condemn it,
but showed a willing mind to suffer for the fact which
he confessed. In like manner the younger brother,
Thomas, though he were a man of very good discourse
and had delivered his mind at large before the Council
about the whole matter, and that in so good order and
with such resolution that he was much commended and
pitied by them all, so far that the Earl of Salisbury said
if his case were any other but for this Powder Treason,
he would have saved his life; yet now in this place he
said little or nothing for himself, rather showing a contented,
ready mind to suffer: only he asked mercy of
the King for his brother, who was, as he said, drawn into
the action by himself. It is not amiss to see what is
said of them both by that pamphlet which was then by
some base person published of their arraignment and
execution; for that being written in as disgraceful manner
of them as could be devised, it is the surer witness of
anything that may be well interpreted of their mind.
Of the elder he hath this, that he said little, but had a
guilty conscience, that he swallowed and concealed his
grief and made little show of sorrow for that time. Of
the younger, he saith that he thought himself already
half a saint for his whole villainy, that he said little that
either made show of sorrow or sought mercy, but only
made a request to the King for his brother, &amp;c. By which
relation set down to their disgrace, it may appear what
opinion they had of the attempt itself and of their present
state of mind in regard of their intention in the former.
</p>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<p>
Mr. Rookwood spake more at large, declaring how
he had ever been brought up in the Catholic religion,
and taught to fear God from his infancy; that he was
the rather induced to attempt this enterprise, as thinking
it the only likely means to restore the Catholic religion;
that his friendship also and love to Mr. Catesby was
such as moved him the sooner to follow his counsel and
example: he requested, withal, favour for his wife and
children. Of him the aforesaid book hath these words,
<q>That he would fain have made his bringing up and
breeding in idolatry to have been some excuse to his
villainy; but a fair tale could not help a foul deed.</q>
So he.
</p>

<p>
Of Mr. Grant the book hath this. <q>Grant, stubborn
in his idolatry, nothing penitent for his villainy, asked
little mercy; but, as it were, careless of grace, received
the doom of his desert.</q> In which words one may
sufficiently see the state of the man's mind to be answerable
to the description in the &mdash;<note place='foot'>The sixth.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> chapter, though in
other language here expressed, where the Catholic religion
is, as you see, esteemed and called idolatry.
</p>

<p>
The youngest brother of the three Winters did speak
little, but only that he did not begin nor assist to the
Plot of Powder, but was after drawn in by the example
and persuasion of his brother.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Faulks did show a mind answerable to his former
proceedings, and gave that reason for his pleading not
guilty which I set down before in this chapter: for his
own part freely and willingly acknowledging the fact, for
which he was ready to suffer.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Keyes did speak but few words, but such as did
make show of great spirit. He affirmed that the persecution
was such before they undertook this business, and
himself had his goods seized with such violence, that to
live in such misery seemed worse than death, and therefore
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
to free both himself and others, he was glad of this
occasion.
</p>

<p>
Bates, being the last of the eight which were all
included in one indictment, and being but a serving-man,
showed more servile fear both now and at his death
than any of them all, answerable perhaps to the motives
that made him first to undertake it, which being most
like to be the love to his master, or some such human
respect, so now he showed most sense in foregoing that
which it seems before he had most respected.
</p>

<p>
Last of all was read a particular indictment of Sir
Everard Digby, of which he stood indicted and convicted
already in the country in the county of Northampton, where
the matter was imparted unto him by Mr. Robert Catesby,
and where he gave his consent with promise to provide
1,500<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> in money, with horses and other furniture fit for
assistance and prosecution of the enterprise, as he himself
had formerly confessed and now again acknowledged at
the bar. Therefore when his indictment was read to this
effect, and he required to speak what he would in his
own defence, he answered that he could not deny the
fact nor would defend it, but that he must needs defend
his intention, which was to please God and profit others
by the action; that his motives were neither for ambition
and desire of worldly preferment, nor discontentment of
his worldly estate, which it was well known he had no
cause to mislike, nor yet was he moved thereunto by
malice or ill-will against any particular person; but that
his motives were these. First, that which moved him to
listen and to trust and to conceal the matter being opened
unto him, was his love to Mr. Catesby, for whose love
and friendship he would have adventured his estates and
fortunes. But another greater reason which moved him
indeed to enter into the action was the relief of Catholics,
for whom he saw no other remedy, seeing that the King,
he said, had broken his word and promise of giving relief
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
unto them, at least by toleration; which promise, said he,
they received from him by divers messages; and whereof
now there was no hope at all, but rather that they did
all expect and see a preparation to make other laws in
that Parliament more strict than the former, and that
they had to that end packed all the Puritans together,
which was the cause that moved them the rather to
attempt that matter against the Parliament House. But
the chiefest motive he said was the cause of religion,
which alone, said he, seeing it lay at the stake, in that
behalf he neglected his estate, his life, his name, his
memory, yea, and his posterity and all the world and whatsoever
the world could afford him. These were his words
as near as they could be taken, which were noted by very
many, and he exceedingly pitied even by many of those
that were enemies to his religion, in which he showed so
great a resolution and zeal, with so great estimation
thereof and contempt of himself in regard thereof, which
many of the hearers did so generally commend and so
publicly affirm that they could never forget it, he being
known to have enjoyed and that he might still have
enjoyed as much worldly contentment as any man of his
estate in England. After this he made some petitions unto
the King and Council, that whereas his fault against the
State had passed no further than himself, he neither
having drawn others into the action nor performed anything
to the hurt of others, therefore he desired in like
manner that his punishment might be extended no further
but to himself, and so that his wife and children might
neither of them sustain loss, but the one enjoy her jointure,
the other his lands, so far as they were entailed upon
them in law before this matter was thought of. Also
that his debts might be discharged out of his estate; and
for himself he craved no other favour but that, if it pleased
the King, he might be beheaded instead of hanging.
Lastly, whereas he had noted in the indictment and in
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
Mr. Attorney his speech, divers of the Fathers of the
Society to be accused as principal counsellors and persuaders
unto this enterprise, he there protested that in
his conscience he thought them all clear. And in
particular for Father Gerard he could best testify, being
best acquainted with him, and therefore was bound in
conscience to set down his knowledge that <q>he was wholly
innocent and did never so much as know of the matter,
yea (said he), I never durst tell him of it, for fear he
would have drawn me out of it.</q> This was his testimony
and protestation in that public place, being ready to
receive the sentence of death; which he was likewise
beginning to iterate again at the time of his death, but
that he was interrupted. Now concerning this matter,
if it were not for staying the reader too long from the
story itself, I could here set down certain letters sent
unto the Council by Father Gerard at this very time,
which would make it apparent that he never knew of the
conspiracy until all England knew it. But for that this
chapter will grow too long, I will only set down the
course he took to clear himself and the contents of the
letters in few words, though I have now the copies by me
procured of purpose to have been set down in this place.
</p>

<p>
I made mention before in the &mdash;<note place='foot'>The ninth.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ed.</hi></note> chapter how
Father Gerard, before the proclamation came out, seeing
himself to be searched for as guilty of this conspiracy,
did write a long letter of protestation that he was wholly
innocent and had not the least knowledge of the matter.
This letter was seen to divers and even to the King
himself, as hath been said, and gave good satisfaction.
But notwithstanding this, some heavy friends of his (to
whom he never gave any cause of offence) procured a
proclamation to be set forth against him and two others
of the Society, as hath been said; which when he perceived,
and knowing very well that there was no proof at all which
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
was or could be brought forth against him, he presently
wrote four letters and sent them to London, three of
which were to three of the chiefest of the Council and one
to Sir Everard Digby, then prisoner in the Tower. The
letters to the Council were to the Duke of Lenox, the
Earl of Northampton, and the Earl of Salisbury; in all
which he did humbly and instantly require, that whereas
he was accused of so great a crime, in which he was not
partaker in the least degree, nor ever in any sort made
privy unto it, that it would please them for God's cause
and for their love to equity, to show him so much justice
as to afford him such trial as might be made of his
innocency; whereof he proposed in those letters, two
kinds, the one affirmative, the other negative. The one
was that the letter to Sir Everard Digby, which was sent
enclosed in theirs and unsealed might be delivered in
their presence, and he examined upon the points thereof,
containing a discourse between him and Father Gerard
but three days before the Plot of Powder was publicly
discovered, by which discourse (if any such discourse were
then between them) it was most apparent that Father
Gerard knew nothing in the world of the conspiracy.
And of the verity of that discourse, the Council might
by that letter make full trial, in which the time and
place and words that passed between them were expressly
set down, all which, if Sir Everard Digby did not affirm
and agree with his letter, he would grant they had some
proof against him. The trial by negatives which he
required was this: that it would please them to cause
all the conspirators at the hour of their death to be
publicly examined, whether ever any of them had imparted
the matter unto him, or would but say upon their
conscience that he had the least knowledge thereof, either
by them or any other means. And if they did not all
of them deny it (being urged, as they would answer the
Highest Judge, to speak the sincere truth), he would then
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
yield they had some proof against him, so that the parties
that should so accuse him did it not in hope of pardon, but
did certainly know they should die and did make show
to die in the fear of God and hope of their salvation.
</p>

<p>
These two ways of trial were proposed and most
earnestly requested by Father Gerard in those his letters,
which were as sufficient to try the truth of the matter
(all circumstances considered) as any could be wished.
And these letters were sent in such time to London, as
that they certainly came to the Council's hands that very
day of the arraignment of the conspirators; so that there
was time enough to have had both kinds of trial made
which he required, and in equity and justice might require.
</p>

<p>
But neither of them were performed. And it is thought
generally that they were forborne, because it was sufficiently
known beforehand that thereby he would be proved
clear, whereof the Council were before that persuaded;
but that they were willing to have the proclamation go
forward against him, as against the rest, to hinder him
thereby from conversion of souls and drawing many from
them to the Catholic faith, and that of the better sort,
with whom his conversation and practice was for the
most part; which made them so desirous to take him
by means of the proclamation, even after they knew he
was not guilty of this treason whereof he was accused.
</p>

<p>
And see the providence of God. That Sir Everard
Digby, knowing nothing at all of this Father's demand of
trial by his testimony, yet hearing him so wrongfully accused
in the process against them, he did of his own accord there
publicly protest his knowledge of the Father's innocency,
yea, and of his inclination also against such practices,
which was more than the Father desired in his letters
should be demanded. Now, because these trials were not
made which Father Gerard so earnestly requested, he
therefore, before his going out of England, did publish
these letters to some of his friends, that the world might
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
see how clear he was, and what equal and full trial he
offered to show his innocency.
</p>

<p>
Now, whereas it was reported that Bates had accused
Father Gerard, and that, upon his accusation Father
Gerard was put in the proclamation with the others, that is
also apparently disproved by Bates his own letter, written
a day or two before his arraignment, and sent unto a Priest
his last ghostly Father, who did help him with the Sacraments
after his examinations and some weakness showed
in them, as may appear also by his letter, whereof the
original is kept under his own hand, and may be seen to
be the same handwriting which is annexed unto his examinations
themselves. The true copy is this:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Sir, I humbly thank you for your great comfort and
pains taken for me. I praise God I find myself more
stronger to resist, and do hope shall more and more. Sir,
when I was at Hobadge House, where my master was
slain, that morning at my going away from him, by
reason of the misfortune that fell amongst us by powder,
Mr. Christopher Wright flung me out of a window an
100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, and desired me, as I was a Catholic, to give unto
his wife and his brother's wife 80<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, and take 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> myself.
I took out by guess some 22<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, as I think, and left it with a
friend of mine, and desired him, if I did miscarry in this
action, he should bestow it amongst my children. Now, I
would entreat you to give my fellow George instructions
what to do in it. I refer it to you. Mr. Wright had of
me at times, in money and kine, as much as came to some
28<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, but my master told me he would pay me, but he did
not. Now whether my wife may take that money out of
that I refer to you. Also, further, I have dealt with my
keeper to deal with the Clerk of the Council for my
pardon, and have promised an 100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> if it may be had,
which I made account that money should have served
that turn; but I am out of all hope for that, unless it be
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
God's will to deliver me. This morning I was sent for down,
and there was a fellow ready with a new suit of fustian, and
my keeper made me to essay it, and neither said it was for
me nor anything, but I know it was provided for me.
The meaning I know not. And before that my Lord of
Salisbury asked me what I wanted, and caused the keeper
to buy me a new gown, and bade him use me extraordinary
well. All this makes me full of doubts, for I fear it is but
to serve their own turns of me and then to hang me. Is it
not best for me, if the clothes be offered me, to refuse them?
I pray you resolve me in that, for I have a purpose to tell
the keeper, <q>I have clothes good enough to serve me as long
as I live, I fear, and therefore will none.</q> I beseech you to
send me word what your opinion is in these things being
offered me. At my last being before them I told them I
thought Mr. Greenway knew of this business, but I did not
charge the others with it, but that I saw them all together
with my master at my Lord Vaux's, and that after I saw
Mr. Walley and Mr. Greenway at Coughton, and it is true.
For I was sent thither with a letter, and Mr. Greenway rode
with me to Mr. Winter's to my master, and from thence he
rode to Mr. Abington's. This I told them and no more. For
which I am heartily sorry for, and I trust God will forgive
me, for I did it not out of malice but in hope to gain my
life by it, which I think now did me no good. Thus
desiring your daily prayers I commit you to God.</q>
</quote>

<p>
This is the true copy of his letter, by which it appears
that a man so weak and so ignorant, as here he showeth
himself to be, might easily be wrought upon, especially by
those means that here he expresseth were used to him;
and that such an one to save his life would strain his
conscience far, as indeed he did when he saith that he saw
those three at my Lord Vaux's; for in truth he did not,
nor saw Father Gerard of a year or two before; but if he
had seen him in that place at that time, yet that had been
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
no accusation of this treason (as is sufficiently proved in
the &mdash;<note place='foot'>The ninth.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> chapter where the same matter is handled); and
as himself directly saith in this letter, that he did not
accuse him at all, nor Father Walley, nor the other neither
of knowledge; but only that he thought he knew of the
business: whereby it appears that it is not true, which was
afterwards affirmed in Father Garnett's arraignment that
Bates had told Mr. Greenway of the matter in confession.
And this Bates being the only one of the conspirators of
whom it was reported that he had accused Father Gerard,
which here in plain words you see himself doth say he did
not, it remains apparent that never any did accuse him.
And this letter under Bates his own hand being haply
brought to Father Gerard a little before his departure out
of England,<note place='foot'>When he meant to publish those foresaid letters he had sent unto the
Council, and did withal. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> he did annex the true copy of the same unto
the letters before mentioned, which he had sent unto the
Council, and sent them unto a friend to be published by
him after his departure; and of them all there be divers
copies taken, of which myself have one, in which there is
this clause amongst others for his clearing, which methinks
doth offer enough, if reason may be accepted and the promise
there alleged performed. After he had offered and humbly
desired of the Council two sufficient kinds of trial of his
cause before specified, seeing that neither of them were
performed, in his letter wherewith he published those offers
made, he citeth a sentence out of my Lord of Salisbury his
book then newly come forth, wherein the Earl declared his
mind to be no ways bent to seek the blood of any but
such as had themselves laboured to seek the blood of
others, saying that he only desired, <q>Necis artifices arte
perire suâ.</q><note place='foot'>That the craftsmen of death should perish by their own craft.</note> This sentence (worthy indeed the pen and
practice of a Councillor in so eminent authority<note place='foot'>As the Earl of Salisbury now is placed in. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>) Father
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
Gerard desired should be made the rule or square whereby
the line of his accusation might be straitened; and offered
that if it could be duly proved, that ever, either in this
most unnatural treason or in any other action, he had
wrought or sought the death of any man, let him then
be punished with as cruel a death as wit of man could
devise, and find no eye nor heart to pity him. This was his
offer, and then he addeth further: <q>But if,</q> saith he,
<q>neither this can be proved nor any proofs of my innocency
(whereof there be divers produced for me and none
against me) may be in my case admitted, but that I must
remain, &amp;c., yet I would not the world should think it
doth or can bereave me of that quiet and contentment
of mind, which I have in the confident expectation of
God's protection and favour;</q> and so he goeth forward,
laying down sufficient reasons for both to the full satisfaction
of the reader, both of his innocency touching this
accusation and of his willing acceptance of God's blessed
will and disposition.
</p>

<p>
Now to return unto Sir Everard Digby. After he had
ended his speech with the foresaid protestation,<note place='foot'>Of his knowledge touching Father Gerard his innocency. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> that he
thought assuredly all the Fathers were innocent of this
treason, and that he knew for certain that Father Gerard had
not so much as any knowledge at all thereof, then the Earl
of Northampton made a speech, which he chiefly directed
to Sir Everard Digby in answer of that point, especially
where Sir Everard urged the King's promise for toleration.
And, first, the Earl said that, if he could lament any man
upon earth in that case, he could pity him in respect of his
worth many ways, and the good opinion he had formerly
conceived of him. He witnessed also that Queen Elizabeth
esteemed him much, and, to his own knowledge,
had spoken of Sir Everard with great grace. Then, after
a sufficient discourse, proving by sound reasons the
foulness of this treason, his Lordship came to that
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
promise of the King, which there he utterly denied, and
proved it by Watson his confession before his death, who
had been a chief man to divulge the same before. And
that Watson affirmed likewise, he had given out such
hopes before contrary to his knowledge, only to move
Catholics to a willing acceptance of the King. All which,
though we admit as true, being affirmed by the Earl as
spoken to himself, yet Catholics are not thereby persuaded
that Watson received no such hopes from His Majesty
when he kneeled before him in Scotland. For they think it
much more likely that Watson, being in this peril of death
and in the power of the Council, would misreport his
former persuasion of mind and the cause thereof, thereby
to please the more, and by pleasing to obtain favour, which
divers of his other words at that time, related also in this
speech, did plainly show he did both desire and hope for.
Whereas, when he returned out of Scotland he had no such
cause to dissemble, and to relate such assured promises to
so many Catholics, as it is known he did, if himself had
been out of hope thereof; yea, and that he did not therein
dissemble his sequent actions did apparently prove. For
he was the first man that laboured to persuade Catholics
to take arms against His Majesty, as hath been declared
before (though, thanks be to God, he could prevail but with
a very few therein), which, happening within the first year, it
appears he ran that contrary course so soon as he had the
contrary opinion; which, if he had brought with him out
of Scotland (as he affirmed to the Earl of Northampton in
the time of his imprisonment), then had it been more easy
for him to have persuaded Catholics there was no hope to
be had, and so to have kept him out, than after he had
assured them the contrary, and the King was settled in
his throne, then to persuade them thereunto, which then
was much more difficult and unlikely. And, therefore,
nothing likely he would first have been so forward to plant
that tree, which so soon after himself did first endeavour to
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
cut down, and that with hazard and loss of his life, unless
he had first expected other fruit than afterwards he found.
But Watson's reports were not the greatest grounds that
Catholics did build their hopes upon. Divers men, his
betters much, did affirm the same, whose words were more
esteemed than either Watson's or Percy's in that cause. It
was not the least part of needful policy that such a conceit
should run for current in the minds of Catholics generally,
and such hopes to be thought likely at that time by whomsoever
they were given out, which I will not here dispute;
for that persuasion, no doubt, did strengthen much the
Catholics' mind, which was found so ready to receive their
King with all peace and comfort. And I make no question
but if it pleased His Majesty to perform as much as then
was hoped, it would prove no less profitable in all respects
unto the stability of peace and happiness than pleasing to
the receivers, in regard of their ease and mitigation of their
afflictions.
</p>

<p>
Unto the speech of Sir Everard Digby the Earl of
Salisbury did likewise answer in defence of the King's
word, esteeming that Sir Everard did seem to tax His
Majesty with breach of promise, which many think was
not the intention of the prisoner, but only to show that,
such general hopes being conceived upon some likely
ground as they presumed, and now seeing all hopes to
fail, they were the more easily induced to run this other
course for the redress of their own miseries. And so,
against the likelihood of these hopes, the Earl's speech
did prove fully that the King had always professed the
contrary religion most earnestly, and that His Majesty was
so far from giving hope of toleration that he would not
endure the least motion thereof to be proposed. And yet
the Earl in the same speech declared how His Majesty
had dealt favourably with divers principal Catholic
gentlemen who were sent for to the Court in the time of
Watson his treason before mentioned; at which time
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
finding them free from having their hands in any treason
(said the Earl) they were dismissed with encouragement to
persist in their dutiful carriage, and that the payments for
not going to Church should be forgiven them in respect of
their so much loyalty showed at the King's entry, and for
that they had afterwards kept themselves so free.<note place='foot'>This clause may be omitted in this place, and serve better to be alleged in
the last chapter. <hi rend='italic'>Orig. in marg.</hi></note> In this
speech the Earl of Salisbury did show great zeal to defend
His Majesty from the least touch of breach of his promise,
and therein to disprove that which he thought would be
conceived of Sir Everard Digby's words. And though
otherwise he acknowledged Sir Everard to be his alliance
by marriage, yet it is thought that in regard chiefly of this
his speech, he had not his petition granted of being
beheaded, but was with all the rest adjudged presently to
be hanged, drawn, and quartered, according to the ordinary
form of judgment in case of high treason. So then, having
received the sentence of death, they were all returned to
their prisons until Thursday and Friday following, which
were the days of their execution; only Mr. John Winter
(being the youngest of the three brothers) was not then
put to death, but carried after into the country and
suffered at Worcester, as shall afterward be declared.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sir Everard Digby
his death.</note>
On Thursday, therefore, being the 30th of January, four
of the eight were drawn upon sledges and hurdles from the
Tower to St. Paul's Churchyard, where they were to
suffer, <hi rend='italic'>vidlt.</hi>, Sir Everard Digby, Mr. Robert Winter, Mr.
John Graunt, and &mdash;&mdash; Bates. And being arrived there,
first Sir Everard Digby was taken off the hurdle and led
up to the scaffold, of whom the pamphlet before alleged
set forth of their judgment and death as much to disgrace
them as might be, yet hath these words, <q>First went
up Digby, a man of a goodly personage
and a manly aspect. He enforced himself
to speak as stoutly as he could; his speech was not
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
long and to little good purpose, only that his belied
conscience (being but indeed a blinded conceit) had
led him into this offence, which, in respect of his
religion (<hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> indeed idolatry), he held no offence, but, in
respect of the law, he held an offence, for which he asked
forgiveness; and so, with vain and superstitious crossing
of himself, betook him to his Latin prayers, mumbling to
himself, refusing to have any prayers of any but of the
Romish Catholics, went up the ladder.</q> Thus he. By
which relation, though set down with much ill-will against
him and his religion, yet it is easy to see thereby what
state of mind he died in. The truth is he gave great
satisfaction to all the standers-by.<note place='foot'>Who returned from the execution full of pity towards so worthy a man,
yea, so full of admiration of his fortitude and great opinion of his devotion that
they could talk almost of nothing else all that day. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> When he was first
brought up to the scaffold, after he had commended
himself to God, being wished, as the custom is, to
acknowledge his treason for which he died, he did accordingly
acknowledge the fact intended according to his
judgment, but withal he declared that his motives were no
evil will to any, nor any love to himself for worldly
respects, but the ending of persecution of Catholics, the
good of souls, and the cause of religion. In which regard he
could not condemn himself of any offence to God, though
he granted he had offended the laws of the realm, for
which he asked their pardon, and was willing to suffer
death, and thought nothing too much to suffer for those
respects which had moved him to that enterprise. The
preachers standing by, as the fashion is, did move him
to pray with them. He absolutely refused, and desired
the assistance and prayers of all good Catholics, himself
fell to his prayers with such devotion as much moved all
the beholders. And when he had done, he stood up and
saluted all the noblemen and gentlemen that stood upon
the scaffold, every one according to his estate, to the
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
noblemen with a lower <foreign rend='italic'>congé</foreign>, to others with more show of
equality, but to all in so friendly and so cheerful a manner,
as they afterwards said, he seemed so free from fear of death
as that he showed no feeling at all of any passion therein,
but took his leave of them as he was wont to do when he
went from the Court or out of the city to his own house
in the country; yet withal he showed so great devotion of
mind, so much fervour and humility in his prayers, and so
great confidence in God, as that very many said<note place='foot'>Here wants something. <hi rend='italic'>In another hand, erased in Orig.</hi></note> they made
no doubt but his soul was happy, and wished themselves
might die in the like state of mind. He was no sooner turned
off the ladder but very speedily cut down, and that with
such haste as that he fell upon his face, and so somewhat
bruised his forehead, yet, though he could not be dead, he
made no resistance at the block whilst he was in quartering;
and after his bowels and heart were cast into the fire, and
his head cut off, the hangman holding it up as is usual to
do, it was noted that there was no alteration at all in
his countenance, but had the same man-like and comely
aspect he had before his death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mr Robert Winter
his death.</note>
After him went up Mr. Robert Winter, of whom the
foresaid pamphlet hath this, <q>After him went Winter up
to the scaffold, where he used few words to
any good effect; without asking mercy
either of God or the King for his offence, went up the
ladder, and making a few prayers to himself, staid not long
for his execution.</q> By which words it may appear that Mr.
Winter died much in the like mind and manner as the
other gentleman before him. He was esteemed in his life
to be one of the wisest and most resolute and sufficient
gentlemen in Worcestershire, where he dwelt, as formerly
hath been declared.
</p>

<p>
After him went up Mr. Graunt, who showed extraordinary
zeal, as it may appear by the foresaid book,
which saith <q>that he, being abominably blinded with his
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
idolatry, though he confessed his offence to be heinous, yet
would fain have excused it by his conscience and religion.
He having used a few idle words to ill effect, was, as his
fellows before him, led the way to the halter, and so, after
his crossing of himself, to the last part of his tragedy.</q>
Whereby it appears he alleged the same reasons and died
with the same resolution the former had done.
</p>

<p>
Last of them was Bates, of whom the book saith <q>that
he seemed sorry for his offence, and asked forgiveness
of God and the King and of the whole kingdom,
prayed to God for the preservation of them all; and, as he
said, only for his love to his master (Mr. Robert Catesby)
drawn to forget his duty to God, his King, and country.</q>
These words which Bates spake at his death, and the mind
he showed, declare sufficiently what hath been said of him
before; and his motives being but human respects (as here
he acknowledgeth), no marvel though he had showed less
store of grace and assistance thereof both before and at
his death. But seeing he showed to die penitent for his
fact, it is to be hoped he found mercy at God's hands.
Thus ended the execution of this day. And many of the
beholders returned full of pity and compassion towards so
worthy-minded men as the first three were, especially Sir
Everard Digby, whose fortitude of mind they did so much
admire, and had so great opinion of his devotion that for
all that day and some time after they could talk almost
of nothing else.
</p>

<p>
The next day, being Friday, were drawn from the
Tower to the Old Palace in Westminster over against the
Parliament House, Mr. Thomas Winter, the second brother
of the Winters, Mr. Ambrose Rookwood, Mr. Robert Keyes,
and Mr. Guy Faulks. By the way, as they were drawn
upon the Strand, Mr. Rookwood had provided that he
should be admonished when he came over against the
lodging where his wife lay; and being come unto the
place, he opened his eyes (which before he kept shut to
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
attend better to his prayers), and seeing her stand in a
window to see him pass by, he raised himself as well as he
could up from the hurdle, and said aloud unto her: <q>Pray
for me, pray for me.</q> She answered him also aloud: <q>I
will; and be of good courage and offer thyself wholly to
God. I, for my part, do as freely restore thee to God as
He gave thee unto me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mr. Thomas Winter his death.</note>
Being all come to the place of
execution, first Mr. Thomas Winter was led to the
scaffold, as the principal in the business, who was from
the first acquainted therewith, and a chief actor therein.
Of him the book saith that <q>he seemed after a sort
as it were sorry for his offence, and yet crossed himself,</q>
saith he, <q>as though those were sufficient wards against
the devil; that he protested to die a true Catholic, and
so went up the ladder.</q> Truth is, Mr. Thomas Winter
spake not much at his execution, seeming more willing
to prepare himself for death; whereat some of the
standers-by marvelling, who knew him to be a wise
and well-spoken man, seemed desirous to have him
speak at large. But he answered he had spoken at large
unto the Council concerning all their intentions and the
causes that moved them to that enterprise, and he hoped
he had given satisfaction in the whole; that this was no
time to discourse; he was come to die, wherein he desired
the prayers and assistance of all good Catholics. Only this
he said in particular, that whereas divers of the Fathers of
the Society were accused of counselling and furthering
them in this treason, he could clear them all, and particularly
Father Tesimond, from all fault and participation
therein. And indeed Mr. Thomas Winter might best clear
that good Father, with whom he was best acquainted, and
knew very well how far he was from counselling or plotting
that business. For himself, having first told the Father of
it (as I have heard), long after the thing was ready, and
that in such secret as he might not utter it, but with his
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
leave, unto his Superior only, the Father, both then and
after, did so earnestly persuade him, and by him the rest,
to leave off that course (as his duty was), that Mr. Winter
might well find himself bound in conscience to clear this
Father from his wrongful accusation of being a counseller
and furtherer of the Plot.<note place='foot'>This sentence in the original is underlined, and marked with crosses in
the margin.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mr. Rookwood his death.</note>
Next him came Mr. Rookwood, who
made a speech of some longer time, acknowledged and asked
forgiveness for his offence to His Majesty and the State.
He prayed earnestly for the King and Queen and all their
children, and wished them long life and a happy reign, and
last of all (which, the foresaid book saith, was to mar all the
pottage with one filthy weed) he prayed God to make the
King a Catholic. And so, desiring favour for his wife
and children, protesting, saith the book, to die in his
idolatry, a Romish Catholic, he went up the ladder, and
hanging until he was almost dead, was drawn to the block,
where he gave his last gasp. The devotion and resolute
mind of this gentleman was very well known to many, and
he was very much pitied, as he had been much beloved.
</p>

<p>
After him came Mr. Keyes, of whom the book saith
thus: <q>That he, like a desperate villain, used little speech,
showed small or no sign of repentance, went up the ladder
stoutly, where, not staying the hangman's turn, turned
himself off, and with the swing broke the halter, but after
his fall was quickly drawn to the block and there divided
into four parts.</q> But he did not, as here it is said, leap
down of himself, but when he thought himself ready he
showed his ready mind to go off the ladder without force,
lest the hangman should take him on a sudden, when his
mind was not actually upon it, and so be cause of some
little reluctation.
</p>

<p>
Last of all Mr. Faulks was led to the scaffold, of whom
the book hath this: <q>That his body being weak with
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
torture and sickness he was scarce able to go up the
ladder; also that he made no long speech, but after a
sort seeming to be sorry for his offence, asked a kind of
forgiveness of the King and the State for his bloody
intent, and, with his crosses and idle ceremonies, made his
end upon the gallows and the block.</q> Thus saith the
author of that pamphlet, and where he said that Mr.
Faulks seemed to be sorry after a sort, and asked a kind
of forgiveness, he maketh it apparent that he did as his
fellows had done, acknowledge their intended action to
be displeasing to the King and State, whose favour they
desired, and therefore in that respect asked them forgiveness;
but that they did not hold it for an offence to God in
respect of their intention to please Him and serve Him in
the whole, as thinking when they began the action and
professing when they ended their life that there was no
other likely means to restore religion in England. And
would to God herein they had been as well advised as they
were absolute to believe and follow their own advice. Then
had they neither hurt themselves nor others by this rash
and heady enterprise, most unfit for subjects to undertake
against their Prince and country, especially all attempts
being so forbidden by His Holiness as they were, and so
often and earnestly dissuaded by the Fathers of the
Society, as hath been declared. And yet it is strange to
see how impudently that heretical pamphlet which I have
cited before so often of their arraignment and death
(set forth by one T.W., I know not who), doth rail first at
the Pope himself and then against all Jesuits and Priests,
as against the authors and plotters of this business. For
he saith: <q>Thus I have ended my discourse of the
arraignment and execution of these eight traitors.</q> Then
a little after he prosecuteth in this manner: <q>Was there
ever seen such a hellish Plot since the betraying of the
Lord of Heaven? If the Pope were not a very devil, and
these Jesuits, or rather Jebusites and satanical seminaries,
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
very spirits of wickedness, that whisper in the ears of
Evahs to bring a world of Adams to destruction, how
could nature be senseless or reason so graceless,</q> &amp;c. So
he proceedeth, inveighing against His Holiness and religion,
and all that he imagined did favour or further the same
religion in any great measure.
</p>

<p>
But silence is the best answer to such witless and wilful
assertions, uttered against the truth so many ways manifestly
proved. But this fellow, and such as he is, will rather
<q>impugnare agnitam veritatem</q><note place='foot'>Impugn the known truth.</note> than omit any opportunity
to revile against the Pope and those that most do stand
for his authority; which is no news for poor Catholics in
England to hear of daily to their grief, long before this
act was commenced or thought of by these few laymen,
who had not the counsel or help of any one Priest amongst
them. Yea, for these many years the most part of their
sermons is in this relative kind, devising names of reproach
against His Holiness, so far forth that many youths, when
they are first brought to be Catholics, will hardly be
brought to think that he is a natural man, and not some
devil or monster, as they have heard him often described.
And this custom of the heretics is so common, and yet so
grievous for zealous Catholics to endure, that it is rather to
be pitied than marvelled that these few gentlemen, being
men of great spirit, did want patience to endure any longer
when they saw all other hopes of help to fail them. We
hope all others will be warned hereafter, and temper their
zeal by the counsel of their guides, which, if these had
done, according to the earnest wishes and serious labours
of Father Garnett, then had not he sustained so many
troubles (as I am now to declare) for their trespass, which
he by all lawful means sought to hinder.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII.
Of The Arraignment And Condemnation Of
Father Garnett.</head>

<p>
Whereas it was now plainly and directly known unto
the Council (by the means and in the manner aforesaid)
how far this matter could be laid unto Father Garnett's
charge; and that they had no further expectation to find
him guilty of any help or furtherance at all given by him to
this Powder Treason, it was resolved to proceed against
him only upon his simple knowledge thereof which he had
received in confession; esteeming it not fit to let go this
opportunity, sith no greater advantage could be gotten;
especially seeing by this time all men were full of expectation
what would become of the matter after so long time of
trial and so many and strict examinations. It was hoped
also, that howsoever he might excuse himself from fault in
the sight of God for not revealing the seal and secret of
confession, yet that he could not justify it before the world:
it being accounted treason by the laws of England to
know of treason intended and not to reveal it. In which
law (now) the knowledge which is had by confession is
not excepted; because confession itself being in England
rejected, the good and necessity of the secrecy thereof
is not so much esteemed, as their public peace and prosperous
proceedings in their worldly estate. Upon this
ground therefore it was hoped they had matter enough
against Father Garnett both to make him odious to the
people, and all Jesuits for his sake; and therefore it was
intended, that his trial should be performed in the most
public and solemn manner they could devise, thereby to
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
disgrace the more both him and his religion; for so in
express words the Earl of Salisbury did twice publicly
affirm in the time of his arraignment; and that otherwise
such preparation and solemnity had not been needful for
the arraignment of a poor religious man, and said <q>he held
himself much honoured that day to be an assistant where
God's cause should be so much honoured</q> (meaning the
Protestants' religion). And how should this be performed?
<q>By discrediting,</q> said he, <q>the person of Garnett, on
whom the common adversary had thought to confer the
usurpation of so eminent jurisdiction.</q> So that one may
see plainly the whole day's work was bent against
religion; and whatsoever was pretended against Father
Garnett in this matter, all was directly intended <q>in
odium Catholicæ Fidei.</q><note place='foot'>In hatred of the Catholic faith.</note> And so we may see in the
process of the accusation, when the Attorney brought
against Father Garnett all other former matter that
had been forged against the martyrs in Queen Elizabeth's
time, with which (if they had been true) yet they
could no more have charged Father Garnett with them in
justice, than the child that was then unborn.
</p>

<p>
Therefore the day appointed being come, which was
a Friday, the 28th March, about eight of the clock, he
was brought from the Tower in a coach with the Lieutenant
of the Tower, Sir William Wade, and another
Knight, the curtains being close drawn about them.
Which manner of carriage to judgment being very extraordinary
and not used to any before him, the people did
much wonder at it, and thought it strange he should be so
carried, considering that most of those that were indeed
conspirators in the treason were men of better birth and
blood than he (which by them is much respected) and yet
were used in much different manner. But some did more
truly guess that this was not done for any grace unto him
(whom they sought to disgrace in all they could), but
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
to grace their own cause, by making him seem a man of
greatest account amongst the Papists, against whom they
meant to object and hoped to prove the Powder Treason,
and so all Papists to be as it were proved guilty in him
they chiefly esteemed and followed. But the curtains
doubtless were kept close, that the people might not be
moved with the sight of so reverend a man, or he moved
upon any occasion to speak unto them in his own clearing.
</p>

<p>
There were set in place of judgment in the Guildhall
the Lord Mayor of London (who in that Court is the
King's Lieutenant), the Lord Charles Howard, Earl of
Nottingham, the Lord Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk,
the Lord Somerset, Earl of Worcester, the Lord Henry
Howard, Earl of Northampton, the Lord Robert Cecil,
Earl of Salisbury, with Sir John Popham, Lord Chief
Justice of England, the Lord Chief Baron, and Justice
Yelverton, Commissioners for His Majesty in that behalf,
The Lieutenant of the Tower being come with Father
Garnett to the place of judgment, he returned his writ
unto the Council (by virtue whereof he had kept the
prisoner) together with the body of the prisoner there
present.<note place='foot'>But the Commission was not read, which was expected as needful.
<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The indictment was read and the prisoner called to
hold up his hand at the bar, as the fashion is. The
effect of the indictment was this. <q>That Henry Garnett,
<hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Walley, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Farmer, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Darcy, had conspired with
Robert Catesby and the rest of his confederates (the 9th of
June last past, in the parish of St Michael in the ward of
Queenhithe in London) to withdraw the hearts of the
subjects from their due obedience to God and their King,
and to deprive the King of his crown, to kill him and the
Prince, and to slaughter the whole Parliament assembled,
to raise rebellion, to change religion, to ruin the commonwealth
and to bring in strangers: and that this 9th of
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
June he met with Catesby and Tesimond and did treat of
means to accomplish the same, and did conclude that
Winter, Faulks and others should blow up with powder
the Parliament House.</q> To this indictment the prisoner
pleaded <q>not guilty,</q> and for his trial referred himself to
God and his country as the manner is. Whereupon a jury
of substantial citizens was impanelled, and twelve of
them sworn to try the issue between His Majesty and
Henry Garnett according to the evidence produced against
him; which being done, the indictment was read the
second time, and then Sir John Crooke, Knight, the King's
Serjeant, began to plead in this manner (as near as it
could be remembered by two or three sufficient men that
were present and did carefully observe both that and all
the other speeches).
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The speech of Mr. Crooke,
the King's Serjeant.</note>
<q><q>Nihil est occultum,</q></q> said he, <q><q>quod non manifestabitur;
nihil secretum quod non revelabitur.</q><note place='foot'><q>There is nothing hid, that shall not be revealed; nor secret that shall
not be known</q> (St. Matt. x. 26).</note>
Thus saith the Truth itself,
<q>qui consilium pravorum dissipat:</q><note place='foot'>God <q>disappointeth the counsel of the wicked</q> (Job v. 13).</note> which as it is generally
true, so is the truth thereof laid open in the discovery
of the late horrible treason, which though it were closely
carried, yet by the providence of God, it hath been
most apparently revealed. And truly when I cast mine
eyes upon this prisoner, the rotten root of this corrupted
tree of treason, I am stricken with great horror to
think that under the cover of so grave a countenance,
should lurk such a poisoned heart. He is a man, <q>multorum
nominum sed nullius boni nominis</q><note place='foot'>Of many names but of no good name.</note>&mdash;of no good
name, nor honest conversation, but infamous for many
treasons, and especially for this last and most abominable
treason, whereby he intended the subversion of the King,
Queen, Prince, State, and religion; and for testimony of his
guiltiness therein,</q> he said, <q>they should have <q>loquentia
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
signa, testimonia rerum,</q> and <q>confitentem reum,</q> nay, <q>reos
confitentes,</q><note place='foot'>Speaking signs, the testimonies of circumstances, and the confession of
the accused.</note> that is the persons guilty accusing one the
other. We have,</q> said he, <q>Garnett and Hall accusing
Greenway, as shall be laid open by the ensuing discourse
of him to whom it belongeth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The speech of the
Attorney-General.</note>
This speech being ended, Sir Edward Coke, His
Majesty's Attorney-General, began his speech with a low
voice, that so his words could not at the first be so distinctly
heard: but it tended to this effect.
<q>That this was a later act of this horrible
Powder Treason, that first he craved pardon of their
Lordships that he might reiterate some things of which
he had formerly discoursed, <q>quia nunquam nimis dicitur,
quod nunquam satis discitur.</q><note place='foot'>For that can never be said too often which cannot be sufficiently well
learnt.</note> Secondly, he craved
pardon that without offence to any he might nominate
some great persons, who were sometimes interested in
some of these causes; but he would do it without any
disgrace at all unto their persons, because,</q> said he, <q>there
is great difference to be made between times of hostility and
times of amity. Thirdly, he desired to satisfy two sorts of
people that might marvel this execution of justice should
be so long deferred; the first of such, as might think such
delays inconvenient lest the impunity of the malefactors
might seem to patronize the offence; the second of such
persons, as might think the delay of trial argued his clearness
in the cause. To those both he answered, that the
Lords of the Council (whose great wisdom he would not in
that place much commend, because <q>coram laudare est clam
vituperare</q><note place='foot'>Public praise is private blame.</note>) had spent many days in examinations of
those affairs, and that the prisoner had been twenty-three
[times] examined; so that the trial could not have been much
sooner.</q> (But this seemed to many rather an excuse than
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
accusation to the prisoner, in whom there could not with so
much labour and in so long time be found any crime to
be justly imposed, for <q>frustra fit per plura quod fieri
potest per pauciora.</q><note place='foot'>It is a mistake to use many means when a few will suffice.</note>) <q>But to draw nearer the cause
of the prisoner,</q> said Mr. Attorney. <q>Henry Garnett,
<hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Walley, &amp;c, is a man grave, discreet, wise, learned,
and of excellent ornaments both of nature and arts.</q>
(He might have added grace also, if he had had grace to
see it.) <q>And one that, if he will, may do His Majesty as
much good service as any subject I know in England.</q>
(By this and the like speeches which it seems they used
often, to work him to yield from profession of his faith, it
is apparent they would have given him both life and much
preferment, if he had not rather chosen to die for God than
to live to the world.) <q>Besides this man,</q> saith he, <q>was
a scholar in Winchester, from thence went to Oxford,
and there was well esteemed.</q> (This Mr. Attorney did
mistake, for he was never student in Oxford.) <q>But he
hath abused his learning to the ruin of his country, as we
shall hereafter declare in the discourse following, wherein I
will speak of nothing but of this late horrible treason; which
treason for distinction sake, I will call the Jesuits' treason:
for the Jesuits were the authors thereof; therefore I will not
do them the wrong to take from them anything which is
theirs, especially seeing in every crime <q>plus peccat author
quam actor,</q><note place='foot'>The author of an evil is more guilty than the actual perpetrator.</note> as it appeareth by Adam and Eve and the
serpent.</q> (But here he presupposeth Father Garnett had
counselled the Plot, as the indictment had said before, but
that never was, nor ever can be proved.) <q rend='pre'>In this discourse
I will speak of circumstances and observations touching the
matter in hand: of no other circumstances but of treason,
and of no other treasons but the Jesuits' treasons; and of no
other Jesuits' treasons but such as shall particularly concern
this prisoner, seeing all have been practised, since he was
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
their Superior; and these circumstances I will divide into
precedent, concurrent, and subsequent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For the precedent circumstances; you must understand
this man hath been in England this twenty years,
and from the very first hour he set foot in England
hath been a notorious traitor, because he came in
contrary to a statute made the year before his coming
in, Anno 27º. of our late sovereign of happy memory,
whereby it was made high treason for any Priest that
had received Orders from any authority derived from
the See of Rome beyond the seas, which I beseech your
Lordships to observe; for of Queen Mary's Priests nothing
was spoken in the law.</q> (And the reason hereof is given
in the former &mdash;&mdash;<note place='foot'>The Ninth.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> chapter, but here it is apparent, that this
treason so earnestly urged, was merely matter of religion,
as in all former martyrs.) <q>Contrary to which statute this
prisoner came in, and by consequence at that very instant
was a traitor. But he will say, this is a new law; these laws
were never heard of before Luther's days; this law is a cruel
law, a bloody law, prohibiting men to exercise their function,
to gain souls to God; and that their religion is the old
religion, where ours is the new and confined in England,
where on the contrary side their religion is universal and
embraced of the greatest part of this Christian world. And
thus for the maintenance of their rotten religion, do they
seek to disgrace our gospel and do calumniate just laws
with title of cruelty. But to this I answer,</q> saith he, <q>that if
our religion be as ancient as Luther, it is more ancient than
the Jesuits are.<note place='foot'>(So the Attorney, and truly it is a grief to pass forward in this narration
and not to refute such absurd speeches as a man
findeth therein, but if I should do so this chapter
would be much too long, and it is already sufficiently
done by others. He proceedeth:). <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi> The passage is in a
different hand.</note> Albeit it neither be contained in those
narrow limits of place, nor bounds of time, which they
feignedly imagine, having been ever since the time of Christ
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
and His Apostles. For we do not deny but Rome was the
Mother Church and had thirty-two virginal Martyrs for her
Popes a row; and so continued till in succeeding ages it
brought in a mass of errors and idle ceremonies. But you
will ask, where our Church lurked before Luther's coming
for some hundreds of years. But I say it makes no great
matter where it was, so that I be certain it was; for as a
wedge of gold, if it be mixed with a mass of other metal,</q>
&amp;c. (By your leave, Mr. Attorney, if I know not where the
true Church is, I cannot be of it: if I be not of it, I cannot
be saved: and if this be no matter to you, yet to God's
children it is a great matter. And your simile of the wedge
is lame of all the feet: for the Church if it be invisible to
all men is gone, <q>quia ore fit confessio ad salutem,</q><note place='foot'><q>With the mouth confession is made unto salvation</q> (Rom. x. 10).</note> and so
Christ had no true servants on earth; but this is like your
dream before that the true Church could degenerate into
errors, and yet those coming in, no man being able to name
the time, the place, nor the person, that did alter any substantial
point of faith. But can Mr. Attorney think that
Christ our Lord would put His candle under a bushel, which
He had lighted with so great labour? And that which He
saith no man will do, as being an idle and foolish thing, yet
will Mr. Attorney have the Wisdom of God to do? But
good Mr. Attorney, give me leave to believe Christ our Lord
before you; and therefore that the city could not be hid
which Christ had built upon a hill. And so your imagined
gold is turned into alchymy, and passeth away in smoke;
but if the material wedge of gold be hid, men say you
know where to find it, if you will but search your coffers
with half the pains you took to find out this invisible
wedge of gold. Pardon me for this digression, I could
not well let such false follies pass without a word or two;
but I will not trouble the reader any more, but leave it
to others: neither should I or any other have had need
to admonish Mr. Attorney, if Father Garnett had been
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
suffered to speak at large, as he was often of set purpose
interrupted. But let us proceed in Mr. Attorney his speech.)
<q>For as a wedge of gold, if it be dissolved and mixed with
a mass of brass or other metal, it doth not lose its nature,
but remaineth gold still, although we cannot determine in
what part of the mass it is contained, but the touch-stone
will find that out; so though our Church hath ever been
since Christ His time in the world, yet being mixed and
covered with innovations and errors we cannot tell in what
part it was.</q> (This is the truest word in all Mr. Attorney his
speech, but presently linked with the contrary, for he saith:)
<q>And I dare say it is now more extended than theirs is,
for we have all England, all Scotland, all Germany, all
Denmark, a great part of France, all Poland, and some
part of Italy. Now as for the statute which they call a
bloody and cruel statute, I will make it apparent to be the
mildest law, the sweetest law, the law most full of mercy
and pity,</q> (It is a great pity it were not executed upon
Mr. Attorney:) <q>that ever was enacted by any Prince
so injuriously provoked as she was. And if I prove not
this, then let the world say that Garnett is an honest
man. And to prove this, we must remember that Pius or
rather Impius Quintus, the Pope, in the eleventh year of
our late Queen deceased, sent over a Bull of Excommunication
against Her Majesty, discharging all her subjects
from their allegiance, whereupon arose the insurrection in
the North, and other rebellions, for which divers were
apprehended and executed. And here we may observe the
misery of Popish Catholics, who if they do obey the Bulls
of the Pope are apprehended and hanged as traitors; and
if they do not obey them, are by the Pope excommunicated
and cursed. But to go forward: from this excommunication
also proceeded that the Popish Catholics refused to come
to our churches; so that the reason of refusal is not
religion, but the Pope's Bull, which now being not of force,
there is no doubt but that they both may and will come to
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
our churches.</q> (False.) <q>Then after the suppression of the
rebels in the North, the Popish Catholics being thought too
weak to make a party, then did the Pope give them a
toleration <q>rebus sic stantibus et donec commoda executio
Bullæ fieri posset.</q><note place='foot'>While circumstances should remain as they were, and until it should be
fitting to carry out the Bull.</note> Then to make a party of Popish
Catholics against the Queen, was sent in Campion and a
crew of Priests with him, that laboured to pervert Her
Majesty's subjects and draw them to bloody practices,
which Her Majesty sought to prevent, and withal out of
her singular clemency made a law, and that the fullest of
pity that could be devised, to wit, That they should keep
themselves there (beyond the seas), and not to come into
her dominions under pain of high treason. Now tell me I
pray you, was this law made to spill their blood?</q> (Yes,
either to spill the Blood of Christ by the loss of souls, if
the Priests came not in, or if they did, then theirs.) <q>No,
it was made to save their blood, by keeping them there,
which by coming hither would be spilt in bloody practices</q>
(which were fathered upon them, that it might not seem
to be cause of religion.) <q rend='pre'>Then comes in Garnett in the
twenty-seventh year of the Queen. His purpose was to
prepare the way against the great compounded navy,
which may well be called a compounded navy, because it
consisted of the ships of all nations in Christendom, that
either they could beg, hire, or borrow. He came in, I
say, to be the forerunner of this navy. The Pope was the
inciter and the Spaniards the actors; and this great navy
was overthrown, not so much by our power, as by themselves,
their own ships severing and scattering them. So
that we may well apply those verses to our late sovereign,
which Claudian sung to his Emperor Theodosius:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O nimium dilecta Deo, cui militat æther,</l>
<l>Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.<note place='foot'>O well beloved of God, for whom the very air fights, and the winds
conspire to come to the trumpet call.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<p>
<q>But was this a sufficient warning to the Romish
Catholics to desist from their treasonable practices? No,
for when they saw that open invasion served not their turn,
they took themselves to private treacheries; insomuch that
I dare boldly say</q> (but not truly) <q>there passed no four years
without some one or other treason. For shortly after came
Patrick Collyn, sent from Father Holt and Father Sherwood,
two Jesuits, to kill the Queen. Shortly after cometh Lopez
to poison the Queen, incited likewise by the instigation of
the Jesuits.</q> (This Lopez was a Jew, the Queen's physician,
living in London, a rich man, and knew no Jesuit in the
world, nor was acquainted with any Catholics in England
that I know of.) <q>After him came Yorke and Williams
from Father Holt, who likewise had plotted to kill the
Queen. Not long after him comes Squire, sent by Father
Walpole from Spain, to poison Her Majesty.</q> And here Mr.
Attorney desired licence to advertise the Lords that each
of these treasons were accompanied with some devilish
book. <q>As for example, the plot of Patrick Collyn was
accompanied with the book of Philopater written by
Cresswell the Jesuit, their ledger in Spain. Then cometh
Squire with his plot, and this was accompanied with another
most pernicious book written by Dolman, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Persons,
their great ledger<note place='foot'>Prefect. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> in Rome. And now we are come
to the Spanish treason, which was in the forty-fourth
year of our late sovereign. And that you may know
there was a Spanish treason, you shall understand that
Thomas Winter, and Father Greenway, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Tesimond,
the Jesuit, went over commended by Garnett to offer their
obedience and service to the King of Spain, and to promise
him their assistance, when time should serve for advancement
of his title to the crown of England, and withal to
entreat him to send them an army, to be conveyed hither
by the galleys of Spinola; which army, if it were great,
should land in Kent; if it were small, it might land at
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
Milford Haven; that they should bring with them a round
sum of money, and in the meantime to bestow some annual
pensions upon certain discontented persons here; and that
they for their part would prepare two thousand horses,
which in such attempts were like to be the greatest want.
This motion being made to the King, they were brought
unto him; from him they were directed to the Duke of
Lerma, who received them gracefully, and finally for their
answer they were referred to the Conde de Miranda, who
assured them the King his master liked very well of their
motion and would be ready to further them in their just
request, and would henceforward account the English as
his own Castilians. With this resolution Thomas Winter
and Greenway returned, expecting the next summer the
arrival of their navy. And here were not wanting the books
I mentioned before; but what books? They had no books
indeed; but that want was supplied with two Breves or
Bulls, as we call them, and they were most pernicious and
treacherous, which by God's providence came lately to
light. The first was directed <q>Principibus et Nobilibus
Catholicis totius Regni Anglicani.</q><note place='foot'>To the Catholic Princes and Nobles of the whole Kingdom of England.</note> The tenour of this first
was an admonition that <q>postquam contigerit miseram
fœminam e vitâ excedere,</q></q><note place='foot'>When it shall happen that that miserable woman shall depart this life.</note> &amp;c. Here you may mark this
foul-mouthed monster that calleth our dread sovereign of
happy memory, <q>miseram fœminam;</q> being one of the
most renowned of Princes. (Here the reader indeed hath
cause to mark a foul mouth, that durst call the Vicegerent
of God Himself a foul-mouthed monster; nor will he mark
that the Bull speaking only of the time after the Queen's
death, was not to accompany the army, which, if any such
were intended, was to come at a certain prefixed time; yea,
it rather showeth the Pope would have nothing attempted
in her lifetime.) <q>But well,</q> saith he, <q>what followeth in the
Bull? Marry, when it shall happen that miserable woman
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
shall depart this life, they shall not admit of any other to
succeed in her place, <q>quâcumque propinquitate sanguinis
niteretur,</q><note place='foot'>Whatsoever be the nearness of blood on which his claim rests.</note> except that first they promise not only to tolerate
the Catholic religion, but also do bind themselves by oath
to maintain it and no other: and this to deprive King James
from his rightful inheritance</q> (nay, rather to move him to be
Catholic, and so to get him also a much greater kingdom in
Heaven). <q>To exclude him therefore cometh this roaring
Bull, that warned them also to give notice of her sickness or
death, as soon as may be, when it should happen, to his
Legate in Flanders. And so accordingly presently upon
her indisposition, Christopher Wright was despatched with
letters of commendation from Garnett the Jesuit, as appeared
by a confession then produced and read. And here, my Lords,
let me observe another circumstance very markable; that
these peculiar traitors were severally commended by Garnett
the Jesuit, as for example, Thomas Winter went over:
wherefore? For treason; and yet was he commended by
Garnett the Jesuit. Christopher Wright went over: wherefore?
For treason; and yet was he likewise commended by
Garnett the Jesuit. Guy Faulks was sent over: wherefore?
For treason&mdash;that is, to solicit and deal with Owen, that
Spinola and Sir William Stanley might draw their forces
near to the sea-side, that when the time served they might
come over with the more expedition: and yet he also is
commended by Garnett the Jesuit. Sir Edward Baynham
was sent over to acquaint the Pope with this business, when
the blow should be given</q> (By this known untruth the rest
may be judged of the better:) <q>which Edward Baynham
was a fit messenger between the Pope and the devil; and
yet he had also letters of commendation from Garnett the
Jesuit. So that hereby it is apparent that Garnett was
not only privy, but consenting to their several practices.
Now when King James was settled in this kingdom, and
received of all, then did Garnett burn the Bull. But out of
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
that Bull did Catesby infer that it was lawful for him to
entertain any practice against our sovereign that now is;
for, said he, it is as lawful for us to expel him and cast him
out now, seeing by experience he doth persecute religion,
as by the Breve it was lawful to resist him and reject, when
we did but fear he would not favour Catholics.</q> (True it
is Mr. Catesby did argue thus; but was answered by
Father Garnett, that the case was not like before and after
admission, and that we must not by ourselves attempt anything,
the Pope now commanding to be quiet.) <q rend='pre'>The
other Bull was to the Archpriest and his associates,
commending their patience and longanimity, and willing
them to counsel all sorts of lay people to be forward in
execution of the Pope's command. Well then, out of
these circumstances, I infer that Garnett was not only
privy, but an author and actor in this treason.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But now let us consider other circumstances that are
<q>omni acceptione majores.</q><note place='foot'>Unexceptionable.</note> Your Lordships must understand
that Garnett would not be known to any of the actors in
these bloody practices, but only to Catesby, being a man
<q>vafro et versuto ingenio et profundâ perfidiâ,</q><note place='foot'>Of a cunning and subtle wit and profound perfidy.</note> so that all
we have against him must be chiefly drawn from himself.</q>
(Indeed Mr. Catesby was dead, and never affirmed any
such thing, and the rest of the conspirators in their examinations
and public speeches affirmed the contrary; so that
Mr. Attorney did want proof very much, when he brought
in a dead man to be witness, like to them that brought the
sleeping soldiers at Christ His sepulchre to be witnesses
that his body was stolen whilst they were asleep.) <q>Well
then, this Garnett confesseth that Catesby had in general
imparted to him that something would be done by the
Catholics, but could not reveal in particular what it was
without the consent of two others of his consorts, which
Garnett saith he dissuaded him from; but how know we
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
that he did so? Only by his own words, who useth to deal
sincerely in nothing that concerneth himself. But I will
prove that he did not dissuade them, but did encourage
them, even to the Powder Treason itself.</q> (Here, by the
way, I would gladly ask Mr. Attorney how he doth save
the accusation recited in the indictment from a false
slander, where it is said that Garnett and Greenway did in
the beginning meet with Catesby at Queenhithe, and there
conclude upon destroying the King and Queen and the
Parliament House by powder? How could this be true,
seeing that here now long after, and after the gentlemen
had concluded as it seems of the matter, and bound one
another to secrecy, so that as you see Mr. Catesby could
not reveal it to Father Garnett without leave of two others,
Father Garnett was all this while ignorant of it: yea, and
now also had but a general knowledge of something to be
done, from which also he dissuaded them? We may see in
this contradiction Father Garnett his innocency; and
that Mr. Attorney should be mindful of what he hath
said, if he will not say the truth. But let us see how
he seeketh to prove by likelihoods, that here Father
Garnett, getting some knowledge of the thing in general,
did persuade it in particular.) <q>For
Father Garnett,</q> said he, <q>confesseth
moreover that Mr. Catesby did in general terms propound
a case unto him, whether it were not lawful
to destroy many enemies assembled together to our
ruin, although some innocents must needs be inwrapped
in the slaughter. To this Garnett answered that in
just war when a town or castle is besieged that could
not be taken without battering the walls, and that not
to be performed without perishing of some innocents,
in that case, if the advantage which redounded to the
general good by the death of those enemies were greater
than the loss should be by the destruction of those
innocents, that then it was lawful. I beseech your Lordships
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
mark here, that Garnett approveth this fact in
particular; for this resolution was Catesby's whole ground;
and this I prove by Rookwood his confession (which he
brought forth), and therein it appeared that when Catesby
made the first overture of this matter unto him, he conceived
great horror of the fact in respect of the innocents that
were to be there, whereunto Catesby answered, that he had
advice of the most learned, that it was lawful, not by proposing
the case in particular, but in a like.</q> (Here Mr.
Attorney, by his plain proof which he promised, hath
proved himself to be guilty of a malicious and false
inference, and Father Garnett to be clear from all furtherance
to the Plot. For, first, this case was put to Father
Garnett before the time this general notice of something in
hand was given him by Mr. Catesby: though here Mr.
Attorney did maliciously put it after, to make it seem that
Father Garnett might gather some light what should be
meant by them, hearing now this particular case out of the
former general knowledge, which the Attorney saith he
had before received. But the general knowledge came after,
which I prove by these alleged words of Mr. Attorney.
For here he saith, he had resolution in this case before he
acquainted Rookwood; and that general knowledge was
given after the matter was commenced: for, so he said,
there was something in hand, but he could not tell him
without leave of two; at which time Father Garnett
refused to know the matter, but dissuaded it in general.
Now that he proveth also Father Garnett clear from
persuasion or consent, I prove by his own words, where he
saith that Mr. Catesby persuaded Mr. Rookwood to yield,
upon the resolution he had received of the like case, not of
the same case; whereby it appears, they first concluded of
it amongst themselves, and the rest consented to it, without
Father Garnett his knowledge or privity, much less his
counsel. Now whereas Mr. Attorney will needs conclude,
that because Mr. Catesby did infer the lawfulness of the
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
particular out of the resolution in general, therefore Father
Garnett should be guilty of the powder; by the same
reason he may prove many Doctors in the Schools, and the
most learned writers that are or have been, to be guilty of
the same treason; for they deliver the same doctrine in the
same case, as it was put to Father Garnett. And as they,
being wholly ignorant of the matter, cannot be touched
with it, for delivering their true opinion, so Father Garnett,
when that case was put, thought of nothing less than that
they had any such intent. And afterward when he perceived
something in general, that he also laboured to
hinder by persuasion: and so no way to be blamed, but
much to be commended, if he had his right).
</p>

<p>
<q>Then further,</q> says Mr. Attorney, <q>Garnett, under
pretence of a journey to St. Winifred's Well, and I know
not what marriage, retired himself into Warwickshire,
which was the rendezvous for all the conspirators,
pretending he had no place to abide in until the
Parliament.</q> (It is well known to many Catholics that
all the safe lodgings which Father Garnett had about
London were lately before discovered, and that was a chief
cause of his journey; and it was unfit to take a new house
about London, before they might see what laws would be
made at the Parliament, which were expected would be
such as there would be no abiding there.) <q rend='pre'>He also made
a prayer for the great business about the Parliament time,
which was</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Gentem<note place='foot'>Take away the faithless people from the boundaries of the Faithful, that
we may joyfully give due praises unto Christ.</note> auferte perfidam</l>
<l>Credentium de finibus,</l>
<l>Ut Christo laudes debitas</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Persolvamus alacriter.</q><note place='foot'>This was the hymn of that time, being the Feast of All Saints, and so
applied by Father Garnett to the hindrance of heretics in making heretical laws
intended against Catholics. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<p>
Now for the subsequent circumstances Mr. Attorney
produced, an interlocution between Father Garnett and
Father Ouldcorne in the Tower; which thing is before
declared at large and therefore needs not here be set
down, the chapter growing too long by other points
not before so much declared. Only this here is to be
noted, that Mr. Attorney reported the matter otherwise
than it was; for he said, that by reason the Tower was full
of prisoners, the Lieutenant was constrained for want of
room to lodge them in two chambers joining one upon
another, which they perceiving did often discourse together,
and being overheard by the Lieutenant's men passing to
other prisoners, some of them were placed near adjoining
to overhear them.<note place='foot'>Thus he. But he did not know that my Lord of Salisbury would afterwards
tell the case truly that it was done of policy. So we see that Mr.
Attorney can add and diminish like a cunning orator. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> And so out of that interlocution, and
Father Garnett his confession taken by the Lords after the
same, he proved that Father Garnett was told in confession
of the Powder Treason; which point alone he was able
to prove against Father Garnett, and the which Father
Garnett acknowledged, but proved it to be both lawful and
necessary for him to proceed as he did therein. Then Mr.
Attorney began to exaggerate the greatness of the treason,
because it was intended against so worthy a Prince, and
so noble a progeny, in whose praises he spent a long time;
but not needful to be set down in this place. Then he
praised and sought to please the City of London, affirming
that the King, in desire to give contentment unto the
city, had caused that solemn trial to be made in that
place, which belonged to the public justice of the city.
</p>

<p>
Then he returned to Father Garnett, and said that he
and the Jesuits had plotted these foresaid treasons against all
these so worthy persons; and that the Jesuits were Doctors
of four D's; first of Dissimulation, wherein he made an
invective against the doctrine of equivocation, showing a
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
written book of that matter which had been taken in some
search, the title whereof was written with Father Garnett
his own hand, <q>Against lying and untruths;</q> and, said Mr.
Attorney,<note place='foot'>(Either mistaking or misreporting the state of the question). <hi rend='italic'>Erased
in Orig.</hi></note> <q>If this doctrine might be admitted, that men
may swear and forswear what they list, there would be no
martyrs: the holy Ridley, Cranmer, and Latimer would
not have been martyred.</q> (These were three notorious
heretics burnt in Queen Mary's time.) <q>The thirty-two
Popes, that were virginal martyrs, would not have suffered
on a row. This doctrine was begun by Arius, who having
a schedule of the Catholic doctrine in his left hand, and
another of his own opinion in his bosom, laid his right
hand upon his breast and sware he believed and would
maintain that doctrine <emph>he had in his hand</emph> during his life.</q>
(Many such things he said against <q>equivocatio,</q> either
mistaking or misreporting wholly the state of the question.)
The second D, he said, was Deposing of Princes, for which
he produced a place out of Philopater, affirming that
heretics cannot bear rule over Catholics; and another out of
Dolman's book of titles to the like effect, also two places of
Simanha, whom he termed the Spanish Jesuit. The first,
that all heretics were excommunicate <hi rend='italic'>de jure</hi> at Easter,
and were excommunicate <hi rend='italic'>de facto</hi>. The second was that
a Prince once excommunicate <q>amittit jus regnandi;</q><note place='foot'>Loses the right of reigning.</note> and
not only for himself, but for his heirs. The third D, is the
Disposing of kingdoms, for proof whereof, he alleged that
they would have disposed of the kingdom of England to
the Infanta of Spain, without any memory of King James.
The fourth and last D, was the Deterring of Princes with
fear of their excommunications, and I know not what. And
then, with some invectives against Jesuits, he dehorted all
men from conversing with them, with this saying, <q>Qui
cum Jesu itis, non itis cum Jesuitis.</q> <q>Neither,</q> said he, <q>are
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
their Priests less perilous than they of whom I hope I may
presage the destruction near at hand; for seeing I am
informed they are in number about four hundred, they may
fitly be resembled to the four hundred false prophets that
Micheas had in his company;<note place='foot'>Dreamed of. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> for as they were possessed of
lying spirits and then perishing, so may we hope that these
Priests and Jesuits publicly teaching this doctrine of lying
and equivocating are near their downfall.</q> And then
making a low reverence he concluded his speech.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Father Garnett
his speech.</note>
Mr. Attorney having ended,<note place='foot'>His long discourse. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> Father Garnett, having
first made his reverence with a very modest countenance
began his speech, first craving pardon for the
weakness of his memory, if he should fail to give them
satisfaction in any particular that had been objected
against him. <q>But I trust,</q> said he, <q rend='pre'>with the
help of Mr. Attorney, I shall fail in nothing of
consequence. And considering the whole discourse of Mr.
Attorney, I find the things by him treated of, may be
reduced to four principal heads: the first, concerning our
doctrine in general; the second, concerning recusants in
general; third, concerning Jesuits in general; the last, concerning
myself in particular.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>1. Concerning Catholic
doctrine in general.</note>
<q>And for the first, Mr. Attorney inveigheth greatly
against that point of doctrine wherein
we teach that equivocations in some cases
may be lawfully used, as a doctrine which he supposeth
to hinder Martyrs from their crowns and to
break the bonds of human society; neither of which
can ensue out of that doctrine, as we do teach it.
For we do not teach (as Mr. Attorney affirmeth) that
it is lawful to equivocate in matters of faith; but we
teach the contrary most expressly, rejecting that doctrine
as an heresy, condemned long since in the Priscilianists.
Yea, some Catholics have suffered death for answering
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
directly to questions which they might have avoided, but
that they feared they should then equivocate in matters
of faith, or seem to deny their religion. And, my Lords,
because I have discoursed to your Lordships of this point
heretofore, and to other learned men sent to me in the
Tower, I will be the shorter at this present: and as I
say, it is never lawful to equivocate in matters of faith, so
also in matters of human conversation, it may not be used
promiscually, or at our pleasure; as in matters of contract,
in matters of testimony, or before a competent judge, or
to the prejudice of any third person: in which cases we
judge it altogether unlawful. But only we think it lawful
when it is no way prejudicial to others and to be used for
our own or our brother's good, or when we are pressed to
questions that are hurtful to be answered unto, or urged
upon examination to answer to one who is no competent
judge, or who would force us to open matters not liable to
his court: as if they should examine me of the secrets of
my heart, or the secrets I have heard in confession;
because these secrets are not liable to any external court,
I may in these cases, for avoiding of inconvenience, and
redeeming my own vexation, lawfully use some reservation.
Neither doth this liberty prejudice any whit human
conversation; but it is conformable to reason, agreeable to
the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and to the consent of all
learned men, without contradiction of any one that ever I
heard or read of, who teach generally with St. Thomas of
Aquin, affirming the same which I have said, in several
places, and specially in that place where he teacheth that
if a Confessor should by any man whosoever be examined
concerning points which he knoweth only by confession, he
may lawfully, yea, he is bound to disavow them. And this
doctrine is also found in the Scripture itself; for confirmation
whereof, I will cite only two places. The first is
that place where our Saviour being demanded concerning
the Day of Judgment by His disciples made answer, <q>De
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
die illâ nemo novit, neque Angeli Dei, neque filius hominis,
nisi solus Pater.</q><note place='foot'><q>Of that day or hour no man knoweth, neither the Angels in heaven,
nor the Son, but the Father</q> (St. Mark xiii. 32; Cf. St. Matt. xxiv. 36).</note> But certain it is that Christ our
Saviour did know of the Day of Judgment, not
only as He was God, but as He was Man also, as all holy
Doctors and Divines do constantly affirm. Wherefore it
cannot be denied but therein He used some mental reservation.
For lying can no ways be tolerable and much less
practised by Him that is the rule and measure of all truth,
as St. Augustine excellently proveth in that place where he
distinguisheth eight kind of lies, all of them being sins; and
the least of those when it is <q>mendacium officiosum,</q> to
the good of some, without the hurt of any. So that seeing
this saying of our Saviour cannot be verified otherwise but,
as St. Augustine expoundeth it, with this secret reservation
that He knew it not to reveal it, it cannot be denied but
these reservations in some cases are lawful. The second
example is, where He said to His Disciples, <q>Vos ascendite
ad diem festum hunc: ego autem non ascendo ad diem
festum istum.</q><note place='foot'><q>Go you up to this festival-day: but I go not up to this festival-day</q>
(St. John vii. 8).</note> And yet, notwithstanding, the
Evangelist affirmeth that after they were gone to the feast,
<q>tunc et ipse ascendit ad diem festum non manifeste, sed
quasi in occulto,</q><note place='foot'><q>Then He also went up to the feast, not publicly, but as it were in
private</q> (St. John vii. 10).</note> which argueth that in this general denial
to go, He meant only that He would not go in public,
which in His mind He reserved.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here my Lord of Salisbury interrupted the prisoner and
said, that because the truth was oftentimes more plainly
discovered by interposition of questions and answers, than
by a continual speech delivered together, he would ask of
Mr. Garnett one question concerning that doctrine he
delivered. <q>For you teach it,</q> said he, <q>to be unlawful to
equivocate before a competent judge, and I trust you take
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
us to be such. At the least I do. Now did not you deny in
the Tower unto me with earnest asseveration, that you had
not any conference with Hall, until the witness was produced
against you, and then you confessed it? Is not this
to equivocate before a competent judge, and in a matter of
small consequence?</q> To this the prisoner answered that
he did so because, until the witness came, he did think
the matter wholly secret, and therefore not liable to the
examination of any judge, though otherwise competent;
besides he deemed it prejudicial to a third person, whom
then he accounted an honest man. Then he went forward
in his speech.
</p>

<p>
<q>The second point of our doctrine,</q> said he, <q>that Mr.
Attorney greatly inveigheth against, is the doctrine of deposing
of Princes and excommunicating of Kings. Whereof
although I could discourse at large, yet for that I am unwilling
in this honourable assembly to speak anything which
may be offensive to His Majesty or to them, I will only say a
word or two in just excuse of myself and my brethren, the
Catholics of England. And, first, I beseech your Lordships
to consider that our doctrine in this point is the very same
which is taught and holden by all Catholic Divines and
other subjects in all Catholic Universities and countries of
the Christian world, which subjects are not by their Princes
censured for this doctrine or condemned as traitors, nor
their doctrine judged to be seditious or treasonable. And
therefore I cannot see why we, concurring with them and
with all our predecessors in this kingdom, without
innovation or changing any one principle or tittle in that
matter, should be so severely branded with such notes of
infamy. Secondly, for clearing our case the more, I will
observe a great difference to be made between our
Sovereign that now is, and other Princes that have once
embraced and professed the Catholic faith and do afterwards
revolt and decline into heresies, parting themselves from
that body unto which they were before united, disjoining
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
and dividing themselves from that Head to whom before
they had submitted themselves and by whom they were
governed; for they incur the censures which those authors,
cited by Mr. Attorney, do speak of, and are punishable by
that power which in precedent times they admitted. But
His Majesty's case is different from theirs; for he maintaineth
no other doctrine than that which from his cradle
he hath been nourished and brought up in. And therefore
those general sentences are not by any private
man to be applied to his case in particular.</q> Here the
Earl of Salisbury again interrupted him and demanded
if the Pope could excommunicate King James, his
Sovereign. The prisoner answered, <q>My Lord, I cannot
deny the authority of His Holiness.</q> Then my Lord of
Salisbury demanded, whether if he should be excommunicated,
it were lawful for his subjects to rebel against
him. <q>My Lord,</q> said he, <q>I have already answered that
point. I beseech your Lordship to press me no further.
You have my opinion in the Canon of Nos Sanctorum
which I before alleged.</q> Then Mr. Attorney produced the
Canon, which was publicly read with derision of divers
standers-by, who thought it ridiculous that the Pope
should have such authority over Princes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>2. Concerning recusants
in general.</note>
After this the Father proceeded and
the second thing he would answer
unto, should be recusants in general, <q>who,</q> saith he,
<q>are accused by Mr. Attorney that they only grounded
their recusancy upon the excommunication of the Queen
by Pius V<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>tus</hi>, which, if it were true, then Mr. Attorney
did infer that, seeing that our Sovereign that now is
stands not excommunicate, it were lawful to repair
to the churches and service of England. But if this
were lawful, doubtless Catholics would have done it before
this, thereby to avoid the penalty of those statutes
which in that case are enacted. Neither is it true, that
Mr. Attorney so constantly avoucheth, that till the eleventh
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
year of Queen Elizabeth all Catholics did resort to their
churches. For I knew many Catholics at that time living,
that I am certain never went to Protestants' churches in
their lives. And Sir Thomas Fitzherbert of my knowledge
did not only refuse it before that time himself, but also had
written a treatise to prove that it could not be tolerated in
any Catholic; and it is apparent to the world that before
that time many Catholic Bishops and Priests were
imprisoned for their refusal. Whereby it is evident that
their recusancy is not founded upon any excommunication;
but only upon mere matter of conscience, judging it unlawful
to communicate in their service<note place='foot'>In divinis. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> with such as have
separated themselves from the Church. Which doctrine is
as ancient as the condemnation of the Arian heresy; for
even then the Catholics refused <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in divinis</foreign> to communicate
with the Arians, albeit they had Priests, Masses, Altars
and their whole service, the same both in substance and
ceremony. Which doctrine hath also been taught by the
most learned of the Protestants, Calvin, Luther, Beza and
others, who all teach it to be unlawful to be present at our
service, not only at Mass, which they count idolatry, but
at Evensong also. Yet I grant this point was not so
clearly understood by Catholics here until the Council of
Trent, where twelve most grave and learned men were
appointed to consult and conclude of this matter; who
without controversy determined, that it was in no case
lawful to communicate with the heretics in their service, no,
not to avoid any torment whatsoever. And their decision
was by the whole Council approved; although the same
was also concluded of by the Council of Nice above 1,300
years ago.</q> Here again he was interrupted by my Lord
of Salisbury, saying, <q>You go about to seduce the people.</q>
The rest of his speech only tended to the City of London,
and seemed to tell them they should see such an anatomy
of the Popish doctrine, that he hoped after that it would
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
not have so many followers, with other words to like effect;
which speech being ended, the prisoner resumed his
discourse and said:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>3. The Jesuits in
general.</note>
<q rend='pre'>The third thing I determined to speak
of was the Jesuits in general; of whom some
have been by Mr. Attorney accused of undertaking
several treasonable attempts, as the matters of Patrick
Collyn, Yorke, Williams, and Squire, of all which I can
say no more but this, that I have had the hands and
protestations of those Fathers that are accused, as Father
Holt and Father Walpole, who on their salvations
affirm they never treated with the parties concerning any
such matter; and that it was very unlikely, seeing the
enterprisers of them were no Catholics, or but feigned
Catholics, as Yorke and Squire were, who died Protestants,
and were of so little acquaintance with those Fathers that
it was no way probable they would employ them in
matters of such weight. And howsoever they might in
time of torture, or for fear, be brought to accuse themselves,
yet at their death some of them discovered the practices
and protested they died innocent of the facts for which
they suffered, as Williams and Squire did. And for
Father Sherwood, accused also by Mr. Attorney, there
neither is nor was any such Father of the Society. Indeed
there was one of that name that entered the Society; but
he died before he came to be Priest. But I am sure there
was none such of the Society, as Mr. Attorney accuseth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>4. Father Garnett in
particular.</note>
<q>Now for myself in particular. First
I protest I am clear from approving, and
much more from furthering, either this or any other
treasonable attempts, and have ever thought and taught
them to be unlawful; and have by all my best endeavours
laboured to divert and suppress them. True it is,<note place='foot'>Albeit I must acknowledge. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> that
I did understand in general by Mr. Catesby,<note place='foot'>Long since. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> that
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
he would have attempted something for the good of
Catholics; which I dissuaded him from so effectually, that
I well hoped he would have desisted from all such
pretences. And this I revealed not, because as a Religious
Priest I thought to suppress it between him and me;
which course our Saviour prescribeth, warning us, that if
our brother offend in anything, we should admonish him
between him and us: and if this prevail, <q>Lucratus es
fratrem tuum,</q><note place='foot'><q>Thou shalt gain thy brother</q> (St. Matt. xviii. 15).</note> saith our Saviour; and if that reclaim him
not, then we may proceed further. Now, my Lords,
because I was persuaded that upon this admonition he
would give over his former designs, I held myself in
conscience discharged from making any further discovery
of that practice. Howbeit that in your common law I
think that insufficient, in regard it deemeth it not convenient
to leave the safety of the commonwealth
depending on the discretion or peculiar provision of any
private person. But yet, my Lords, that I did dislike such
proceedings, and as much as I could did endeavour to
reclaim them, your Lordships may gather by the express
commandment which I procured by means of our Superior,
whereby was expressly forbidden all attempts against the
King in general, and also by the endeavours I used as
seriously as I could to procure the like prohibition, and that
under pain of some heavier censure: which I would never
have endeavoured, if I had any way approved it. And I
knew very well His Holiness much disliked all such courses;
and, as I was informed, commended my care and vigilancy
in seeking to repress the former stirs, wherein Watson and
Clarke did join with others the first year of the King's
coming into England. And lastly, in that I knew them to
be contrary to our Religious obedience (of which virtue in
the Society we make special account), by which we were
expressly forbidden to meddle in any such causes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here Mr. Attorney interrupted him and said, that he
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
did not forbid them, for he could prove no such matter, but
only by his words, who used to speak the best in favour of
himself, <q>and,</q> said he, <q>for that prohibition which you
procured, I do not think you did it for love to us, but for
your own ends, lest that by some matter of small importance
your main plot should be prevented and hindered.</q>
To this he answered, <q>That all were prohibited in general,
and therefore it could not be in favour of any one in
particular.</q> (Besides that prohibition was procured long
before Father Garnett knew of this particular designment
of those gentlemen, which as it appears by all proofs, was
long after the powder was all placed, and but a little time
before it should have been put in execution.) <q>And, Mr.
Attorney,</q> said Father Garnett, <q>howsoever you labour to
misconstrue my intentions, my meaning was so as I have
said. And to proceed further, I am blamed also for giving
letters of commendation to Mr. Thomas Winter and Faulks
and others that went over (as now it appears) for accomplishing
of treasons. And to this I answer, that I gave them
indeed letters of commendation; but I protest I knew not
that they went over about matters of treason, for that I never
inquired of their businesses. But if I knew them to be
Catholic men and of good conversation, then,<note place='foot'>Upon means made unto me. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> without
further inquiry, I gave them letters to testify so much to
my friends beyond seas, desiring their favours and furtherance
for them in any ordinary matter of courtesy or charity.
And the like letters I have given to divers other Catholics
that were no ways to be touched with any treacherous
attempts: and these were altogether unknown to me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here my Lord of Salisbury did interrupt him. <q>Mr.
Garnett,</q> said he, <q>did you give them the letters without
knowing the end why they were sent over?</q> <q>Yea,
my Lord,</q> said he. <q>Why,</q> said my Lord of Salisbury,
<q>did not you yourself tell me that you did nominate
Sir Edmond Baynham as a fit man to go over to the
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
Pope?</q> <q>My Lord,</q> said Father Garnett, <q>I told your
Honour thus much: that it was thought convenient that
some one should inform His Holiness of the estate of our
country, and that it was a great charge to send over one of
purpose for that business; knowing therefore that Sir
Edmond Baynham was going over, and had been so
resolved for above two years, I thought it better, that now
he might discharge that care and save that charge, than
that one should be sent over to the Pope of set purpose to
inform of the state of England.</q> <q>Nay,</q> said my Lord of
Salisbury, <q>you told me that Sir Edmond Baynham went
over to acquaint the Pope with this Plot of Treason, and
that therefore you would not have him said to be sent by
you, because the Pope would be offended that you employed
a layman in that business.</q> <q>My Lord,</q> said Father
Garnett, <q>at the going over of Sir Edmond Baynham I did
not know of that treason myself, and therefore could not
think that Sir Edmond went to acquaint him with it.</q>
(Note the modesty of this Father that would not contradict
the Earl, although the matter touched him very near; but
rather proved, by a necessary consequence, that he could
not say so unto him, than he would seem to aver the other
had misreported his words.) <q>Nay I am persuaded,</q>
said the Father, <q>that Mr. Catesby would not have
revealed the matter in particular to the Pope himself.
Howbeit, afterwards I imagined with myself that peradventure
Mr. Catesby by his means might intend to
acquaint His Holiness with some pretence in general
for the Catholic cause, which they would undertake if
His Holiness should approve it And this I supposed
only because Mr. Catesby promised me that he would
not go forward with any attempt till the Pope had
been acquainted and made privy to it And I said to your
Lordship, that therefore I would not that Sir Edmond
should be sent from us; for that it would displease the Pope
we should send or employ any person whomsoever in the
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
affairs of England; but refer them to others, whom it more
concerned.</q><note place='foot'>This part may be omitted. <hi rend='italic'>In marg. against this sentence.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Then Mr. Attorney replied that Mr. Faulks had
confessed that Sir Edmond Baynham was to give notice
unto the Pope of this their attempt: and to this effect was
produced a confession of Faulks which said that Sir
Edmond Baynham was sent to Rome to acquaint the Pope
with the matter when the blow should be given, and to
crave his assistance and furtherance in all. To this he
answered: <q>What they determined, I know not. And it
may be, they thought at that time to have conveyed him
some letter to give him notice thereof. But it is more
than I know, and very unlikely that the first news should
come by me, for the common fame and rumour thereof
would have prevented my letters by a great while.</q> Then
said Mr. Attorney: <q>You see, my Lords, what great care
this man had for the preventing of this so great a danger;
and yet he saith he did not approve nor consent to it.
But I will prove that he did both; for, as I have said
before, he gave Catesby the resolution that it was lawful
to be done not in that case, but in another like to it; which
notwithstanding was the sole ground Catesby stood upon,
as appeareth by Rookwood's confession, before alleged and
now again produced and read. Besides he made a prayer
for the good success of the Powder Treason, about the
time it should have been put in practice, he having known
thereof in particular before by Greenway his confession.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The case concerning innocents,
answered by Father Garnett.</note>
To this the prisoner answered:
<q>That the case was proposed to him
in general, and so he resolved it, being a case common
in all just wars, where if a town could not be taken,
or a wall beaten down without the death of some
innocents, all casuists do hold that fact to be lawful. But
that Mr. Catesby misapplied this general question, was
neither fault nor approbation of mine; which when I heard
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
<note place='margin'>The prayer objected to Father
Garnett answered by him.</note>
of, I conceived a great horror at the thing itself, and
thought it would be a scandal and disgrace to Catholics;
and therefore, besides the former means which I had used
to suppress it, I did also in my prayers desire some milder
course might be taken, if it were God's will.</q> <q>Nay,</q> said
my Lord of Salisbury, <q>you prayed not with that condition;
for you said to me in the gallery, that although we did not
approve of your Masses, yet you did think assuredly that
they had done us good; for you prayed heartily that it
might not come to pass, except it were for the good of the
Church.</q> Father Garnett answered
<q>that he said not so; but that he
desired God to make a milder course, if it were His
holy will. As for the prayer upon All-Hallow Day,
wherein you note those words so precisely, <q>Gentem
auferte perfidam,</q> you must understand it was the hymn
of the same Feast, which in my exhortation I admonished
the hearers to iterate unto Almighty God for the Catholic
cause, the Parliament being then at hand, and great fears in
us of more severity ensuing towards us; and therefore I
meant not the Powder Treason, but to desire God that He
would put in the mind of His Majesty and the Lords there
assembled in the Parliament not to permit those rigorous
laws to pass against us, which we feared would at that
time be concluded of, and to restrain the too much forwardness
of some others in the company that were more violent
against us.</q> <q>Indeed,</q> said Mr. Attorney, <q>you said you
would so colour it.</q> <q>No, in truth,</q> said the Father,
<q>that was my true intention.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then witnesses were called into the Court which had
heard the interlocution; and Mr. Attorney spake in commendation
of one of them, saying he was a great linguist, a
Justice of Peace, and a learned man, and one that would do
wrong to no man. Father Garnett said he thought so too,
but he might be mistaken, for that which he said was no
more but that he could answer that point very well, for he
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
would say (as in truth it was) that he meant, that the laws
intended might not pass against us. <q>And how say you,
Mr. Fawcet, bethink yourself, were you not mistaken?</q>
(Here one may see the good Father had some hope left,
that some sparks of grace and true dealing had been left in
the man according to his former promises of friendly
meaning; but he found the contrary, and that they were
agreed together what they would aver, <q>convenientes in unum
adversus christum Domini,</q><note place='foot'>Agreeing together against the anointed of the Lord (<hi rend='italic'>Vid.</hi> Psalm ii. 2).</note> for he answered,) <q>No,</q> said he,
<q>we both understood it so and writ it down so, and have had
so great care to do you no wrong, that we omitted divers
things wherein we agreed not, and nothing was set down,
but with both our consents.</q> <q>No,</q> saith my Lord of
Salisbury, <q>if we would touch you with the testimony of one
witness, we could charge you with further matters than
these, but we will not do so, that the world may see what
mildness and mercy we use in execution of justice, and to
this end my Sovereign determined that your trial should be
in this honourable assembly. For who is Garnett that he
should be called hither; or we should trouble ourselves in
this Court with him? which I protest were sufficient for the
greatest Cardinal in Rome, if in this case he should be
tried. No, Mr. Garnett, it is not for your cause that you
are called hither, but to testify to the world the foulness
of your fact, the errors of your religion, and His
Majesty's clemency. For these causes His Majesty ordained
your trial should be in this Court before this honourable
assembly, wherein we may glory as much as if the greatest
Cardinal in Rome were pleading at the bar. And,
therefore, the witness is a man of reputation and who
would do you no wrong.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Garnett said he thought so too, but he might be
mistaken. <q>No,</q> said my Lord of Salisbury, <q>he was near
you enough to understand your words: for Hall and you,
of policy, were lodged so near one to the other and in such a
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
place where your interlocutions might be easily heard.</q>
(Here it appears Mr. Attorney his speech was idle when he
said it was for want of rooms and by chance that they
were overheard; but he did not foresee that the Earl
meant to make the truth in this point of policy serve his
turn for a further policy, as here it appeareth. Unto which
end also the good usage was directed to satisfy the
Ambassadors who were then present, and others that were
like to inquire of his usage in particular.) <q>For Christian
policy is not to be condemned in any well-governed
commonwealth, and if we should not use such courses, I
know not how we should deal with such people as you.
You have in your pamphlets so described us for cruelties
and persecutions. But let him testify that is here at the
bar, whether he hath not been used with extraordinary
favour? How say you, Mr. Garnett, is it not so?</q> <q>My
Lord,</q> said the Father, <q>I must acknowledge my entreaty
to have been very honourable, for which I esteem myself
much bound to His Majesty.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then my Lord of Salisbury urged that he was
bound to have discovered the Powder Treason which he
knew by Greenway his confession, <q>being no sacramental
confession by your own laws,</q> said he, <q>for it had no
contrition and was <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de futuris</foreign>, and so could not be a
Sacrament in your own religion.</q> (This point is answered
where the thing itself is particularly declared at the time and
place when it happened. Here the Father did only answer
to the Earl's chief intention and said:) <q>Though he
nothing doubted but Mr. Greenway had contrition and all
things needful to make it a sacramental confession, yet
howsoever the party were penitent or not, the Confessor
may not reveal it without mortal sin, if he utter himself in
confession, and not in derision of the Sacrament.</q> Then
said the Earl of Northampton, <q>Mr. Garnett, Greenway in
his reservative clause was more careful of you than of the
King or commonwealth, in giving liberty to you to reveal
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
it in time of your own danger, which should have
been rather to have prevented the danger to the King
and commonwealth.</q> Father Garnett answered that Mr.
Greenway having it himself also from them by confession,
was restrained and limited how far he should give leave to
open it; and that the Confessor hath no extensive liberty
at all further than the penitent gives unto him.
</p>

<p>
Then said the Earl of Nottingham, <q>Mr. Garnett,
if a man should tell you in confession that he would
stab the King with a dagger to-morrow, are you not
bound to reveal it?</q> <q>My Lord,</q> said he, <q>unless
I could know it by some other means, I might not.</q>
Hereupon the people fell into a great laughter, not
understanding that the secrecy of confession concerneth a
greater good in the life of many souls, than the corporal life
can be of any particular man. When the laughter ceased,
the Father proceeded and said, <q>In that case, my Lord,
my duty were to dissuade the party from it, to refuse
to give absolution, and by all<note place='foot'>Indirect. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> means to labour to
divert it, which might not open the confession.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then said the Earl of Northampton, <q>Mr. Garnett, you
were consenting to the Powder Treason, for you did not
forbid it: and it is a case by every good Priest approved,
that <q>Qui non prohibet cum potest, jubet.</q></q><note place='foot'>Not to prohibit when possible, is to order.</note> <q>My Lord,</q>
said the Father, <q>I did prohibit it, as much as in me lay.</q>
My Lord of Northampton replied, <q>Why did you not then
make it known to those that could and would have hindered
it?</q> Father Garnett answered, as before, that he could
not do it, because he knew it only in confession. Then the
Attorney pressed him in this manner. <q>Although you could
not discover Mr. Greenway, by whose confession you knew
it, yet might you have well discovered what you understood
concerning Catesby and his associates, whose confessions
you heard not.</q> The Father answered, <q>What sin soever is
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
heard in confession, although it concern not the penitent
but some other, cannot lawfully be revealed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Attorney then urged him with his being in
Warwickshire at that time when these troubles should
have happened, amplifying it again, as in his former speech
he had done. To which Father Garnett answered that
by reason of a journey which he had made that summer to
St. Winifred's Well, he passed through that country, and
was by the entreaty of some of his friends and some
occasion also of business detained there for a time, not
suspecting any such troubles would have happened in that
place: which, if by any forecast he could have foreseen,
they might well imagine he would in discretion have been
a good way off from that place and country.
</p>

<p>
<q>But,</q> said my Lord of Salisbury, <q>what did you,
Mr. Garnett, the 6th day of November, when Bates
came to you with a letter from Catesby, after the Plot
was discovered and they in open rebellion?</q> <q>My
Lord,</q> said Father Garnett, <q>I said I would not meddle
with him that had wrought himself into such treasonable
attempts, and thereby endangered himself and his friends.</q>
<q>Yea, but,</q> replied the Earl of Salisbury, <q>did not you send
Greenway to Catesby, who went to raise the countries
abroad?</q> <q>My Lord,</q> said Father Garnett, <q>he went
without my knowledge; neither could I gather by any
speech of his that he had any such intention, as Bates
could testify, if he were alive.</q> And indeed Bates
had said as much as that in his letter, before set down
verbatim in the 11th chapter, which was more than Father
Garnett could know of.
</p>

<p>
Then, for conclusion, Mr. Attorney desired license
to read a letter written by Mr. Tresham, lying upon
his death-bed in the Tower, wherein upon his salvation
he cleared Father Garnett of any notice of the
Spanish treason, protesting that he had wronged him
in it, and that he had not seen Father Garnett of
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
fourteen years before. <q>Now,</q> said Mr. Attorney, <q>to prove
this untrue, here is a confession of Mrs. Ann Vaux, who
(though otherwise a very obstinate woman) yet in this she
confesseth plainly, that within these three years Tresham
had been several times at her house with Father Garnett,
and twice this last year, at which times Father Garnett had
given him very good counsel. So that you see,</q> saith
Mr. Attorney, <q>they will swear and forswear anything.</q>
The like said my Earl of Salisbury upon the same
occasion.
</p>

<p>
But they did not (or would not) mark, that Mrs.
Ann Vaux her confession doth make nothing at all
against Mr. Tresham his protestation; for he said not
he had not seen Father Garnett within the last three
years; but that he had not seen him of fourteen years
before the Spanish treason, which was the year before
the Queen's death; as his words are plain, and the cause
also of his writing doth make it plain, for his intention was
only to clear the Father of the Spanish treason, which he
had wrongfully accused him of, and therefore it was a very
material proof that he had not seen him of fourteen years
before that business;<note place='foot'>This may be left out. <hi rend='italic'>In marg.</hi></note> but they would needs draw his meaning
to be, that he had not seen him of fourteen years before the
writing of the letter. But this was their misconstruing, not
his equivocating; yea, then his words had been very
unproper, for he should rather then have said, <q>I have not
seen him of fourteen year, or this fourteen years;</q> but
whereas he said, <q>I did not see him of fourteen years
before,</q> he must needs mean of fourteen years before the
time he spake of, which was the Spanish treason. Therefore
they were to blame, that did so much insult upon Mr.
Tresham after his death, as though he had been found to
have protested an untruth. But they did it to take
occasion to infer thereby that other protestations also were
like to be untrue, which divers of the conspirators had
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
made before their death to clear the Fathers. But against
theirs, no pretence of exception could be alleged; but only
that theirs might be false, because this was false: which
had been an evil consequence, although this had not been
true. But this of Mr. Tresham's was true: and the others
undoubted, and no ways to be disproved. And it is worthy
to be noted how Almighty God did permit them now, at
the end of this long day's trial of Father Garnett, to bring
forth this letter (whereby they thought so clearly to disprove
such testimonies as might be afterwards brought for
Father Garnett), which letter did indeed so clearly prove
him innocent in that former dealing with Spain, whereof
there were more likely presumptions against him than
about this Powder Treason.
</p>

<p>
The cause and manner of writing this letter was
this. Mr. Thomas Winter had confessed that six gentlemen
were acquainted with that Plot, but could say
nothing of Father Garnett, that he did so much as
know of it. Mr. Tresham acknowledged in his first
examinations that himself was acquainted with it, <hi rend='italic'>vdlt.</hi>,
that money and men should have come from thence;
and being found more fearful and easy to be wrought upon
than the rest, he was urged to confess Garnett to be privy
thereunto; to which he answered, <q>Perhaps he was.</q> On
which words reflecting afterwards when he lay in extremity
of sickness in the Tower, and prepared himself to die, he
thought the Council would take advantage against Father
Garnett by that which he had said: therefore before his
death he caused his man to write in his name unto the Earl
of Salisbury, protesting upon his salvation, that Mr. Garnett
was not acquainted therewith, &amp;c, as before was set down
out of the letter read. This letter he was not then able to
sign himself, he was so weak at that time, and therefore
caused his wife to do it, and commanded her, as she would
answer it before God, to deliver it to my Lord of Salisbury,
for the discharge of his conscience; but afterwards growing
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
somewhat better, he did call for the writing again, and
signed it with his own hand. And his wife after his
death, because she could not be admitted to come to my
Lord of Salisbury, inclosed it in a letter of her own, and
sent it to his Lordship. And the man that wrote this
letter, being afterwards taken by Sir William Wade,
Lieutenant of the Tower, for fear of his threats, affirmed
his master had written the letter himself (not daring to be
known, that he had written it at his master's appointment),
but afterwards being at liberty, he went to the Recorder
and affirmed before him, that it was his master that had
caused him to write it, and had himself subscribed it: and
for this the man was committed to a close and strait
prison, to Bridewell, the worst prison about London.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding all this, upon the reading of this letter,
my Lord of Salisbury presupposed it as granted that Mr.
Tresham did mean to equivocate in this letter, which the
good Father did not contradict, not observing perhaps the
circumstance of Mr. Tresham his words before alleged,
which was no marvel, being clean wearied out with so long
standing at the bar, and answering to every man's questions
before, which more concerned himself; and himself so often
interrupted in his own discourse, that it was misliked by
divers of the standers-by; yea, the King himself, who was
there in private, sent word at length to my Lord of
Salisbury, he should give the prisoner leave to speak freely.
My Lord of Salisbury therefore took occasion upon this
supposition to speak at large, and said, though he would
not meddle with Mr. Garnett in matters of divinity, yet
because he had been particularly employed in that service,
he desired to demonstrate with what sincerity and moderation
His Majesty's justice was carried in all points. And
so he discoursed of the manner of the proceeding therein,
and said it was not performed with such solemnity in
respect of Garnett, who was but a private man, but to
discredit in his person his religion, and to credit the
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
Gospel, and also to show the King's just proceedings to the
world, and withal to favour the City of London, in doing it
in the sight of the city. Then he showed how gently Father
Garnett had been used, more like a nurse-child than otherwise,
and that in this arraignment divers things had been
permitted to be read, which made for Father Garnett; as
namely this testimony of Mrs. Vaux, who, said the Earl,
would sacrifice her life to do him good. And so he concluded,
affirming that the whole course of proceedings
in that matter had been mixed with such clemency,
as he thought there was none so malicious that could
calumniate. My Lord of Northampton also made a speech
much to the like effect, to show the foulness of the Plot
of Powder, the just and merciful proceedings of the King,
and the presumptions of Father Garnett his being guilty.
</p>

<p>
Which done, the jury was willed to go together, and
Father Garnett, ere they departed, desired them they would
take such things as he had denied, to be justly and truly
disavowed, except they had more evidence to the contrary;
and desired them to give their verdict only upon that
which was acknowledged to be true, and not upon any
other presumptions. And so indeed (by God's providence)
it was performed: for they went together for a short time,
and presently returned and pronounced him guilty directly
for not revealing this treason.<note place='foot'>Which was indeed. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
He was then asked whether he had any more to
say for himself, and my Lord of Salisbury told him it
was the King's pleasure he should have free leave to
speak (but this leave was pronounced very late, after so
many hours of continual interruption). The Father
answered he had no more to say but God save the
King; and referred himself to the mercy of God and the
King, and that he desired their Lordships to recommend
his cause unto His Majesty, whom if it would please to
grant him life, he would labour to deserve it the best he
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
could, his conscience reserved. If otherwise, he was prepared
to die.
</p>

<p>
Then Serjeant Crooke prayed judgment might be
given. The crier was willed to proclaim silence. The
Lord Chief Justice, Sir John Popham, pronounced sentence
of judgment against him, which was, to be hanged, drawn,
and quartered.
</p>

<p>
The Earl of Northampton made a second speech to
this effect unto the prisoner. <q>Nothing is, that hath not
been: nor nothing hath been, that is not. That all which
hath been spoken this day might be rightly understood,
you are condemned not for religion or your profession;
but for treason verified by pregnant proofs. It is necessary
to look into the ground of this action and safety of the
King; which by the Scripture is sufficiently commanded
and proved, that there is no cause sufficient to depose
Princes, neither tyranny, nor adultery, nor idolatry, nor
apprehending of Priests, nor simony, nor heresy, nor
apostacy. No power upon earth can dispossess him.
That Popes have attempted it sometimes, hath been abuse
crept in within these five or six hundred years, but the
ancient Popes would never do it, yea, St. Gregory calleth
the Emperor, his Lord. No man may lay hands upon the
King, as is proved by many examples in the Old
Testament. You are commanded in the New Testament
to obey your Princes; and so all the ancient Fathers teach.
For the Prince's life is in no man's power, but in the hands
of God Himself. All examples of Scripture prove you
ought not to touch his body, but to persuade his soul.
You allege the Canon of <hi rend='italic'>Nos Sanctorum</hi> to prove it in the
Pope's power to depose Princes for some causes; but it
never can be proved lawful by any learning or law for this
1600 years. Therefore whosoever doth maintain it, is in
a foul and most gross and grievous error.</q>
</p>

<p>
This was about six or seven o'clock at night. Then
the Court broke up; and Father Garnett being condemned
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
to die was returned back to the Tower until
the day of his execution. The King as he went
from the place of trial, where he had been in private,
was heard to say, they had done the prisoner wrong
to interrupt him so often; and also, that if he had been
in the prisoner's place he could have defended himself
better in some points. The Protestants were generally much
appalled at the beginning of Father Garnett his speech,
and some that came from the hall said, that never any
man did speak so at that bar. But towards the end, they
did weary him exceedingly with so many interruptions and
interrogations. But it did comfort the Catholics much that
he was condemned only for concealing the treason which
he had only heard in confession; and consequently his
condemnation and death was only for concealing confession,
which is a most happy cause, and the case of a
martyr, as all the Catholics did then account him, and as
the justice of his cause did then approve him: and God
hath since his death declared by diverse signs, of which I
will afterwards speak in their fit place.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV.
Of The Arraignment And Execution Of Father
Ouldcorne And Those That Suffered With Him,
And Of The Occurrences There, With A Brief
Relation Of His Life.</head>

<p>
Whilst Father Garnett was kept as yet in the Tower and
the expectation great<note place='foot'>In every place. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> what would become of him, not only
of all the people, but of many principal persons also (the
resolution of the Council concerning him being known to
very few), and whilst, in the meantime, the whole afflicted
company of his friends and spiritual children did join
in earnest prayers unto God for him; whilst this was
the thought and the business of the poor distressed
Catholics, it was determined by the State that Father
Ouldcorne should be sent into the country, where Father
Garnett and he were taken, there to be arraigned,
condemned, and executed. Wherein assuredly the providence
of God, and His sweet disposition was plainly to
be seen both towards the good Father himself and all the
Catholics of that shire. For doubtless a more grateful thing
could not have happened to that Father than to suffer
in that place where he had laboured so long, and now to
water those plants with his innocent blood which he had,
with the help of God's grace, so carefully planted, and so
many years watered before with Catholic doctrine and
instructions of good life. Neither could anything have been
provided more profitable or pleasing to that country than
to have him die amongst them, whom in his life they did
so highly and so worthily esteem, and to see his constancy
at the end of his course, whose virtues they had seen and
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
admired in so many years' conversation. Briefly, they
might well and did esteem it a great happiness to see him
go to a crown of glory who had assisted so many of them
to the obtaining of grace, <q>ut coronati essent in misericordiâ
et miserationibus.</q><note place='foot'>That they might be crowned with mercies and compassion (Cf. Ps. iii. 4).</note> And so to have him a patron
to their country for time to come who had been a pattern
to them in the way of virtue whilst he walked amongst
them.
</p>

<p>
This good Father, therefore, about the midst of Lent
was sent from the Tower towards the county of Worcester,
and with him Mr. Thomas Abington, in whose house both
Father Garnett and Father Ouldcorne were taken; with
them also Mr. John Winter, the youngest of the three
brothers, who was before condemned when his brothers and
the rest of the conspirators were condemned, but was not
executed with them, because the Council would have some
of them executed in the country for the greater terror; and
rather this than the rest, because he was no actor about the
Powder, but only a party in the rebellion, which, therefore,
was thought fittest to be punished where it was performed:
and withal it was the rather deferred until this time of
Father Ouldcorne his execution, to make a show unto the
people that Father Ouldcorne was to be touched with the
same conspiracy or rebellion for which it was known the
other suffered. With him also was sent down Ralph &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;<note place='foot'>Ralph Ashley, for eight years Father Ouldcorne's servant, is believed,
like Nicholas Owen, to have been a Lay-brother of the Society.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
of whom I spake before, who had for some years faithfully
served Father Ouldcorne in his spiritual business and
negotiation for souls, and was taken with him, and brought
up to London with him, and had suffered torture in the
Tower with him, and now was carried down with him, and
was to go to Heaven with him.
</p>

<p>
As they went through Holborn, going out of London,
Mrs. Abington<note place='foot'>The Lord Mounteagle's sister. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> did meet her husband, Mr. Thomas
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
Abington, and, with many tears, took her leave of
him, but yet promised to labour earnestly with the
King for his pardon, which she hoped to obtain the
rather by her brother's means, who was the Lord Mounteagle,
now in special favour, as you may guess, being
the man that had discovered the Plot of Powder.<note place='foot'>As you might read in the beginning. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> Mr.
Abington wished her to be of good comfort, for himself
was not troubled; and withal, willed her to put His
Majesty in mind how he had suffered four years' imprisonment
for his good mother, for whom also his elder brother
was executed, and that himself had never undutifully
thought against him or his in his life. They were all
carried down to Worcester like prisoners, and prisoners
supposed to be guilty of most heinous treason, and their
usage by the way and at their coming to Worcester
answerable thereunto.
</p>

<p>
They were arraigned at the Lent Assizes, which is a
Court of public justice holden twice a year in every county
for the trial, as well of country causes in law, as for life and
death, touching all such malefactors as are taken and do
belong to those shires in which the Assizes are holden.
Therefore, at the Lent Assizes at Worcester were brought
to the bar Father Edward Ouldcorne and Ralph &mdash;&mdash;, also
Mr. Thomas Abington and Mr. Humphrey Littleton, of
whom I have declared before that he was the man in whose
chamber Mr. Robert Winter and Mr. Stephen Littleton
were taken. In which respect this Humphrey Littleton,
hoping to deliver himself from danger of the law (upon
the large promises that were contained in the proclamation
to any that would be the means of taking Father Garnett),
discovered Mr. Abington his house, where both Father
Garnett and Father Ouldcorne were taken. And yet it
was not God's will he should for so evil a deed have his
expected pardon, for his greater good, as it is to be hoped,
for, seeing worldly hopes and promises to fail him, he
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
sought for mercy<note place='foot'>Where it is ever found by those that seek it with a penitent heart, which
he did, and acknowledged his fault to be exceeding great in betraying those
Fathers. And both there publicly in the Shire Hall did ask Father Ouldcorne
publicly forgiveness and again at the time of his execution, acknowledging
that he had done both them and all the Catholics of England great wrong in
being cause of their apprehension. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> at God's hand, and became very penitent
for his fault and frailty showed in that discovery. Mr.
Abington was indicted and condemned upon the statute
of relieving Priests, although he did allege for himself that
which had been sufficient to clear him, <hi rend='italic'>vdlt.</hi>, that he was
absent from his own house, and who might come in his
absence he knew not, nor could hinder; and, before he
came, they were so shut up and besieged in secret places,
that they could not be gone; therefore he, neither being
cause of their coming nor staying, could not justly be
found guilty of that penal statute. But they knew so well
his constant love to Catholic religion (which had been
so often times and so well tried before), and his devotion
also and respect unto Priests was so well known unto them,
that they made no scruple at all to presume that those two
Fathers were there with his approbation and good liking;
in which respect they doubted not to condemn him as
guilty, although, before the time of execution, there came
a reprieve from London, obtained by his wife and the Lord
Mounteagle of His Majesty; and so his life remaineth still
at the King's pleasure, and his lands and goods forfeited:
which lands of his, because they should have returned to
his heirs in case he had been put to death (this statute
being but of felony and not of treason), they might be a
motive to save his life, that so the gain might be greater
by his life than by his death it could be.<note place='foot'>I am uncertain whether he was condemned of felony or treason, because
of harbouring a proclaimed traitor. <hi rend='italic'>In marg. in another hand.</hi></note> The gentleman
showed great constancy, courage, and devotion at the
receiving his judgment, as he had often done before in his
examinations and conventions before many several commissioners
for the cause of religion, where at all times he
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
did answer with such learning, judgment, and sufficiency
(being a man of great reading and of a very good understanding),
that his adversaries were generally unwilling to
deal with him in that kind. And several Bishops of
Worcester (to whom he had been prisoner)<note place='foot'>And the Bishops of Worcester in particular (whose prisoner he had been
before that). <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> had received
diverse foils at his hand both in private and public
conferences.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Humphrey Littleton was indicted and condemned
of high treason, for receiving and harbouring the two
gentlemen before named, Mr. Robert Winter and Stephen
Littleton, who were proclaimed traitors. He acknowledged
that fact, which he could not deny, but yielded he had
much more deserved death for his treason to God in
betraying his servants those two good Fathers, than in
any ill intention he had unto the State, in not delivering
up those two for whom he was condemned.
</p>

<p>
Father Ouldcorne his indictment was so framed that one
might see they much desired to have drawn him within
the compass of some participation of this late treason; to
which effect they first did seem to suppose it as likely that
he should send letters up and down to prepare men's
minds for the insurrection. But for this they had no other
ground but that he was a man so much esteemed by the
best Catholics in those parts, and those countries were the
place which it seemed the conspirators did most trust upon
for assistance. They also did seem to think that he had
written some letters for the relief and conveying away of
Mr. Robert Winter and Mr. Stephen Littleton after their
rebellion, and before they came to Humphrey Littleton's,
where they were apprehended. Also, they accused him of
a sermon made in Christmas, wherein he should seem to
excuse the conspirators, or to extenuate their fact, and,
withal, that speaking with Humphrey Littleton in private
about the same matter, he should advise him not to judge
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
of the cause, or to condemn the gentlemen by the event,
alleging some examples and authorities to prove that God
doth not always give present success to such causes as
yet He doth approve and will afterwards prosper. <q>Sed
nullam istarum causarum poterant probare, Patre rationem
reddente, quoniam neque in Legem, neque in Regem
quicquam peccavit.</q><note place='foot'>But none of these causes could they prove, the Father showing that he
had not sinned in anything, either against the law or against the King.</note>
</p>

<p>
And for the first, being a mere supposition, without any
proof or instance to be alleged, it could not have any force
against him, whereas his protestation was of great force in
denial thereof, affirming seriously, upon his death and salvation,
that he never knew anything at all of that treason, and
that he was as innocent thereof as the child new-born. And
for the second, as they without proof did suppose that he had
holpen to convey away Mr. Robert Winter and Mr. Stephen
Littleton, being his ghostly children and dear friends, he
cleared himself very sufficiently from so unjust an accusation.
But, withal, did prove very learnedly there at the bar,
that if he had so done, yet he could not be justly condemned
for that by any law, all circumstances considered of his
estate and theirs, they having been reputed for so virtuous
men before this error, and might justly be presumed to be
very penitent now for this enterprise so unadvisedly undertaken.<note place='foot'>In which case the gravest casuists of this time. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
For the last, he utterly denied he had spoken
anything, either in public or private exhortations, to justify
the attempt of the conspirators, and declared there what
he had said and with what intention. And Mr. Humphrey
Littleton, who had been his accuser in those points, did
there publicly ask him forgiveness in the Shire Hall, and
said he had much wronged him.
</p>

<p>
But when none of these things could be proved against
him, yet, being a Priest and a Jesuit well known to have
gained many souls to the Catholic faith, he was found guilty
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
by the jury and condemned by the judge to be hanged,
drawn, and quartered, as in case of treason, and as blessed
Father Campian and Father Southwell and others of his
predecessors had been before him. He received the
sentence with joy, and told them there in public that he
had been tortured in the Tower five hours five several days
together, one after another, which, if it were five hours at
a time even one of the days (as his words were understood),
then was it a most great extremity that he sustained. For
one hour's torture will make the hands so swollen and so
sore (besides the pain in the other parts of the body), that
it is a very cruel thing to put a man to the like the next
day after. <q>Sed Deus non deserit sperantes in se, in quo
omnia possumus.</q><note place='foot'>But God, in Whom we can do all things, does not forsake them that
hope in Him (Cf. Jud. xiii. 17).</note>
</p>

<p>
Ralph &mdash;&mdash; was also indicted and condemned, upon
supposition that he had carried letters to and fro about
this conspiracy. But they neither did nor could allege any
instance or proof against him, and he solemnly protested,
upon the salvation of his soul, that he had never known of
the treason in the least degree. So that he could not be
condemned nor suffer for any other cause but for the
helping and assisting the good Father there condemned
with him, in his spiritual functions. Which cause, as it
was glorious in itself, so for it the good and virtuous man
did very gladly accept both sentence of death and death
itself, as he showed most apparently after, when he came
to his execution.
</p>

<p>
Thus they received all four sentence of death, but Mr.
Abington was reprieved, and they three were kept in the
jail together, with Mr. John Winter, until the next Monday
after, which was the day of execution. In the mean time
Father Ouldcorne added one gem more unto his crown by
the conversion of an obstinate sinner, who was condemned
to die for his notorious wickedness. This man <q>cum in
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
eâdem damnatione esset, necdum tamen timebat Deum,</q><note place='foot'>Being under the same condemnation, and not as yet fearing God (Cf.
St. Luke xxii. 40).</note>
but the very day before he was to die went singing and
whistling up and down the prison, and jesting now with
this man and then with another, which thing being
observed by Mr. John Winter, the young man, pitying
much the lamentable state of soul of that poor heretic,
began to admonish him that such neglect of his future
account could not proceed but from a great blindness of
soul and obduration of heart, affirming, withal, that in the
Catholic religion he had been taught a much different
manner of proceeding, especially at such a time. The
careless heretic answered him he saw no cause to be sad,
for he should be with the Lord before the next day at that
time. Mr. Winter replied that he could not be sure of that,
and that it depended much upon his care and penance
and preparation in the mean time. The heretic replied he
need not to take care for that which Christ had taken
care for sufficiently. By which answer and manner of
proceeding of this poor man,<note place='foot'>Blinded soul. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> one may plainly see the
spiritual blindness<note place='foot'>The great blindness of heart. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and desperate danger which heresy
hath brought souls unto in this country, this being not
only an opinion which some of them do hold, but an
absolute point of their faith to believe, that they<note place='foot'>Are elected and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> shall
certainly be saved, and that so soon as they are dead
(because they believe no Purgatory). Yea, this is with
them not only a point of faith, but their very justifying
faith, by which, they say, they must be saved without
necessity of good works. Wherefore no marvel, though
this poor fellow did out of that ground build his secure
and careless proceedings, laying all upon Christ His back,
wherein they pretend that they attribute much to the
Passion of Christ, and that we dishonour the same by
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
requiring the necessary concurrence of our own cooperation.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Winter, finding the heretic obstinate, and yet
seeing and pitying his lamentable estate, told him he
was far wide, <q>but,</q> saith he, <q>if you will talk with
the Father that must die with you to-morrow, he will
make it plain unto you that you are in error, and
will show you the right way how to save your soul.</q>
The man answered he cared not with whom he talked,
for he knew no man could prove him to be in error. Mr.
Winter called the Father, who was retired to his prayers,
and hearing of this opportunity of doing good, came
gladly, took the man aside, and began to catechise the man
with such judgment, learning, and spirit, that he first led
him out of the labyrinth of his errors, then taught him
what was necessary for him to believe and know expressly,
and in all the rest to<note place='foot'>Believe and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> submit his judgment to the Catholic
Church, which he proved unto him invincibly could not
err nor lead into error. Then taught him how to prepare
himself to become a member of that Church, and having
instructed him how to examine his conscience carefully,
sent him away to do it by himself, and promised that
night to hear his confession. The man returned from the
Father greatly satisfied and contented, and forthwith
applied himself to his business, left all his companions,
and got himself into a corner, there to recount his years
so carelessly spent, and so little thought of before that
time. His companions, wondering at this sudden alteration,
came to invite him to be merry and drink with them, as he
had before, but he sent them away with this answer, that
he had serious business to think of. That night the
good Father kept his promise, and reduced this stray
sheep into the flock of Christ, supplying with his
prudence and skill that which, in so short a time and
so raw a scholar, was likely to be<note place='foot'>Must needs be very. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> imperfect in the preparation
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
of his penitent. Yea, he made good proof in this
one patient how great dexterity and skill he had in the
curing of diseased souls. For, with the effectual assistance
of God's grace, he wrought this man's mind, not only to a
constant belief of the Catholic faith, but to a fervent
profession also of the same, and a public demonstration
of a perfect conversion. For the next morning, when the
Father was laid upon the hurdle and drawn to the place of
execution, according to the use and the form of sentence
which was pronounced, this neophyte, being led in company
of other prisoners in a foot-path hard by the horse-way,
when he saw his Father come by lying upon the hurdle, he
suddenly slipped from the rest of the company and stepped
into the horse-way and followed the hurdle directly, though
the way were foul and no footman went in it but himself.
The keepers and the rest of the prisoners called upon him,
and asked him why he did so. He answered, he would
follow his Father to his death, whom he hoped to follow
after death to a better place. <q>Why,</q> said they, <q>art
thou become a Papist?</q> <q>I am a Catholic,</q> said he, <q>I
thank God and this good Father, and so I mean to die.</q>
They replied that he was a notorious thief, and known to
have committed many mischiefs. <q>It is true,</q> said he, <q>I
was so indeed when I was of your religion. I was then a
Protestant and a thief, now I am a Catholic and penitent;
and as heresy was the cause of my disorders then, so
now the Catholic religion is the cause and means of my
repentance.</q> And in this mind and manner of proceeding
he continued till his death, to the admiration of all who had
known his former courses, which gave occasion to divers to
see and acknowledge the great difference between those
trees which brought forth such different fruits.
</p>

<p>
Father Ouldcorne, being come to the place appointed
for their death, first with great fervour commended himself
to Almighty God, to the Blessed Virgin, and to his patron,
St. Jerome, to whom he was ever very much devoted. He
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
then declared unto the people that he came thither to die
for the Catholic faith and for the practice of his function,
seeing that they neither had nor could prove anything
against him which, even by their own laws, was sufficient
to condemn him, but that he was a Priest of the Society
of Jesus, wherein he much rejoiced, and was ready and
desirous to give his life for the profession of that faith
which he had taught many years in that very country,
and which it was necessary for every one to embrace that
would save their souls. Then, being asked again about
the treason and taking part with the conspirators, he protested
there again that he never had the least knowledge of
the treason, and took it upon his death that he was as clear
as the new-born child from the whole Plot or any part
thereof. Then, commending his soul with great devotion,
humility, and confidence into the hands of God and to the
Blessed Virgin, St. Jerome, St. Winifred, and his good
Angel, he was turned off the ladder, and hanging awhile,
was cut down and quartered, and so his innocent and thrice
happy soul went to receive the reward of his many and
great labours.
</p>

<p>
After him followed Ralph, his faithful follower and
companion of his labours, who showed at his death great
devotion and fervour, as may be guessed by this one action
of his; for whilst Father Ouldcorne stood upon the ladder
and was preparing himself to die, Ralph, standing by the
ladder, suddenly stepped forward and takes hold of his
good Father's feet, embracing and kissing them with great
devotion, and said, <q>What a happy man am I, to follow
here the steps of my sweet Father!</q> And when his own
turn came, he also first commended himself by earnest
prayers unto God, then told the people that he died for
religion and not for treason, whereof he had not had the
least knowledge; and as he had heard this good Father
before him freely forgive his persecutors and pray for the
King and country, so did he also. Then, before he was
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
stripped of his clothes (which is usual to all such as are
afterwards to be quartered, that their bodies may be the
sooner cut up after they are laid upon the block), he,
perceiving a Catholic maid of his acquaintance stand
weeping by the gallows, he ungartereth himself, and, with
dexterity, casteth them so unto her that others could not
perceive that he did it of purpose. But the maid doth still
keep the garters as great jewels, and thereby it may appear
what opinion he had of his own innocency and the cause of
his death. He showed at his death great resolution joined
with great devotion, and so resigning his soul into the
hands of God, was turned off the ladder, and changed this
life for a better.
</p>

<p>
At this time also suffered Mr. John Winter, who, as I
have said, was condemned at London with his two brothers
and the rest of the conspirators, but reserved to die at
this time for reasons before declared in the beginning of
this chapter. He died with great show of devotion and
good state of mind, as might appear also by his fervent
endeavours the night before to help towards the conversion
of that soul before mentioned. He acknowledged
the fact for which he died, to wit, that he had risen in
arms and joined himself to the other conspirators; but
affirmed that he did it only to restore the Catholic
religion: and so took his death patiently and with
show of a contented, willing mind in respect of that
intention.
</p>

<p>
Then suffered also Mr. Humphrey Littleton, who, before
his death, and before the Father was put to death, did
there again ask him forgiveness, and said he had wronged
him much: also he asked forgiveness of Mr. Abington in
particular, and of all Catholics in general, in respect that
he was the cause of the apprehension of the two Fathers at
Mr. Abington's house, for which he acknowledged he
deserved death much more than for the relieving of Mr.
Robert Winter and his cousin, Mr. Stephen Littleton, for
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
which he was to suffer. He died with show of great
repentance, and so with sorrow and humility and patient
acceptance of his death made amends for his former frailty
and too unworthy desire of life.
</p>

<p>
There had also suffered the like death<note place='foot'>In the same place and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> for the same
occasion, <hi rend='italic'>vdlt.</hi>, for relieving of Mr. Robert Winter and Mr.
Stephen Littleton before they were apprehended, one
Perkises and his man in the same city of Worcester, the
27th of January before<note place='foot'>After the old account. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>: and about the same time, for
the same cause, two others in Wolverhampton: all which I
suppose to have been Catholics, in that it was not likely
those gentlemen would commit themselves to the fidelity
of any others; but as yet I cannot learn the certainty.
That same Mr. Stephen Littleton was sent down into
Staffordshire, to be tried and executed in Stafford, in
respect that his house was in that shire where all the
conspirators were last received, and where some of them
were slain and the rest taken. For which assistance given
unto the conspirators, and for joining with them in open
rebellion, Mr. Stephen Littleton was condemned and executed.
At his death he acknowledged the fact, and said
he did it only for religion, for which he was ready and
willing to die. He showed great resolution and devotion,
to the satisfaction of all the country.
</p>

<p>
With him were sent down twelve or thirteen others,
some gentlemen, some serving-men, who were arraigned
and executed in the same place, who, although they were
taken with their masters being in rebellion, yet they stood
unto it they did it only for religion; and divers of them
were offered their lives if they would go but once to
heretical service, which they refused to do, and, consequently,
died most happily, <q>eligentes potius absque opere
incidere in manus hominum, quam peccare in conspectu
Domini, et morientes propter justitiam regnum cœlorum
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
adepti sunt.</q><note place='foot'>Choosing rather without offence to fall into the hands of men than to sin
in God's sight, and dying for justice's sake, they have gained the Kingdom of
Heaven.</note> But as for Father Ouldcorne and Ralph,
their case was so clear that no Catholics in all the country
doubted to call them, and to call upon them presently as
Martyrs, and did strive exceedingly for some part of their
holy relics. Besides, Almighty God did testify by special
signs the great merits of blessed Father Ouldcorne, which I
think fit here to set down, after some brief rehearsal of the
course of his life, so far as it hath come unto my knowledge.
</p>

<p>
Father Ouldcorne was born in the county of York of
honest and faithful parents, who brought him up in the
Catholic religion, and in his young years kept him to school;
so that he was a good grammar scholar when he first went
over beyond the seas, which was about the twenty-second
year of his age, and some twenty-seven or twenty-eight
years ago.<note place='foot'>Father Ouldcorne suffered April 7, 1606, æt. 45. So Dr. Oliver. Father
Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>infra.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, says that he was <q>near fifty years old.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> He first studied in France in the English
Seminary at Rheims some two or three years, and from
thence was sent to the English College at Rome, where
he remained &mdash;&mdash;<note place='foot'>Seven, according to Father Henry More.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> years. He heard his course of
Logic, Philosophy, and &mdash;&mdash; years of Divinity, in
all which he profited very well, being of a very good
capacity. But his chief care and desire was to profit
in spirit, which he did in such sort as was greatly to
the satisfaction of all his Superiors, and the edification
of the whole College. No man more careful to observe
the rules, no man more forward to the practice of
any mortification, often begging leave of his Superiors
to go to hospitals and to serve in the kitchen, with other
such like practices of humiliation, which he knew to be
usual in the Society, unto which he had a vocation a long
time before he could obtain his desire; though he was not
deferred for any want of liking which his Superiors had,
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
either of his spirit or other talents; but rather in their
desire to further as many good spirits and sufficient men
as they could to the end of the College, and to furnish the
Clergy of England with able men against the time that
God should please to have mercy upon our country. For
the opinion his Superiors had of him was well declared in
the particular choice they made of him, to send him into
the kingdom of Naples and Sicily to negotiate for the
College and to procure some alms, in a time of great want,
when the College was far in debt, being overcharged with
the number of scholars, more than their receipts were able
to maintain; and yet the charity of the governors thereof
such, and the want of fit workmen in the English harvest
so great, that they would not lose good spirits when they
offered themselves to that vocation. Father Ouldcorne,
therefore, was sent about this business; and did perform it
with such discretion and fidelity, that he brought a good
round sum of money unto the College at his return.
</p>

<p>
In the year 1588, he and Father Gerard were received
together into the Society by the Rev. Father Claudius
Aquaviva, General of the same, upon the Assumption of
our Blessed Lady; and within five or six weeks after were
sent together into England, in company with two other
Priests who were not of the Society. By the way Father
Ouldcorne gave very great edification unto all his company
with his religious behaviour, showing in all his actions
great humility and readiness to help and assist any of
them in their needs. When they came to the sea-side,
they understood of the extraordinary difficulty to pass into
England, and of such persecution in England at that time,
as had not been of long time before, the Earl of Leicester
(who then ruled and overruled all under Queen Elizabeth)
having made a solemn vow, that within a twelvemonth he
would not leave one Papist in England; but God with His
mercy prevented the malice of that persecutor, and called
him out of this life within half the time that he had limited
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
for the life of others. But in the meantime he caused divers
to be put to death, both Priests and others, and set watch
and ward in every town, so that none could pass the country
that were not known, and could not satisfy the officers
of their dwelling and manner of life. In which regard
those Fathers of the College where Father Ouldcorne and
Father Gerard stayed whilst a passage was preparing,
would not by any means let them pass, thinking it impossible
they should land safely and get safely to London.
</p>

<p>
Whereupon they wrote back to Rome, to know their
Superiors' mind, yet with earnest suit that it might please
them to permit their going forward. They received answer
from Father Persons, that the times were much more
periculous than was expected when they went from Rome,
yet sith the cause was God's, and their will so good to
prefer the safety of others' souls before the safety of their
own bodies, they might in the name of God proceed, if
their desire still continued; but that it was left unto their
own election. These letters were received with great joy,
and the two Fathers, within few days after, got a ship
wherein they embarked, thinking to have landed in the
north parts of England; but sailing along the coast of
England one evening, and seeing a shore where they might
be set on land, and no town nor house near them to see
where they landed, they resolved to commit themselves to
the providence of God, and caused the sailors<note place='foot'>Shippers. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> to cast
anchor until it was dark, and then in a cock-boat to set
them on land. When they were landed, having first
commended themselves to God, they purposed to have
gone forward in the first way they could find, to get as far
from the sea-side before morning as they could; but they
found that every path did lead them to some house or
other, where the dogs making a noise,<note place='foot'>And finding it so in two or three trials. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> they durst proceed
no further in that course; but got them into a wood, and
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
there stayed all night, whilst it rained a good pace. But
yet they were as merry as might be, and well contented
with their wet lodging, as I have heard one of them affirm
from whom I have these particulars. Towards day they
commended their business earnestly to God, and, after
their prayers, resolved not to adventure both to go one
way to London, but to take several courses, that so if one
were taken in the time of danger, the other might scape.
They therefore looked into their provision of money, and
he that had more gave it unto the other to make it equal,
and then they embraced and gave one the other their
benediction; and one went out on the one side of the
wood, the other went out of the other hand. They never
had been in that country before, nor knew any one person
in the country, nor the way to London, where they
promised to meet. But God provided for them both.
</p>

<p>
Father Ouldcorne joined himself to some company that
he found travelling that way, and being himself of an
excellent wit and very sociable in company, he did so
join those companions that they desired his company to
London, and so they, being known in the way, did pass
freely through watch and ward, and he also as one of
their company was permitted to go without any further
questions. Father Gerard was stayed by the watch in
the first town he went through, and was carried by the
watchmen to the chief officers of the town, who were then
at their heretical service (it being Sunday morning). These
officers willed the watchmen to bring him into service, and
afterwards they would examine him. But Father Gerard
refusing to go into their church, the officers were the more
displeased, and sent twice or thrice commanding him to
come in. But in the end, when they saw he would not,
they were glad to come out to him, and examined him of
many particulars, unto which he answered readily; yet
they threatened to send him to the Commissioners of the
shire. And when he expected no other but to have been
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
sent first to them and then to prison, these officers said,
<q>He looks like an honest man. Let him go; we will not
trouble him.</q> That first danger being past, he came
safely unto the city that was the chief of that shire; and
there, by special providence of God, did light into the
company of some Catholics, and at last came acquainted
with one gentleman of good worth, who provided him a
horse and fit apparel for travel in that country, and
carried him out of the city in his own company and to
his own house; from thence let him have horses and a
man with him to London, so that he passed very safely.
And this gentleman sent earnest request unto his Superior
that he might return into that country, which he granted;
and so Father Gerard stayed a long time in that gentleman's
house, who was his first host, and by his means
got acquaintance in all that country and the countries
thereabouts.
</p>

<p>
Father Ouldcorne and he met at London according
to their first appointment, and by good hap found the
Superior then at London, though his ordinary abode were
then in Warwickshire, almost a hundred miles from
London. There were then no more of the Society in
England but Father Henry Garnett, the Superior, and
Father Robert Southwell, who was since martyred about
eleven years ago,<note place='foot'>Father Southwell was executed February 21, 1595, æt. 34.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> and Father Weston, who was then in
prison,<note place='foot'>Father Weston was apprehended in 1586, and, after imprisonment in the
Clink, was sent to Wisbech Castle in 1587. In 1598 he was prisoner in the
Tower of London, and he was banished in 1603.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> where he remained until this King's time, for the
space of seventeen or eighteen years, and then was
banished with divers other Priests. So that at liberty
there was no more but Father Garnett and Father
Southwell, and these two Fathers last come, of which
Father Gerard was sent back to the country where they
landed, and Father Garnett took Father Ouldcorne with
him into the country where he remained. And there he
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
employed him in divers missions round about,<note place='foot'>The place where he remained. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and found
him so practical and industrious that he doubted not to
send him to the most difficult enterprises. Amongst the
rest there was one gentlewoman,<note place='foot'>Her name is given by Father More as Dorothy Abington.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> sister unto a very honest
Catholic gentleman, their great friend. But this gentlewoman
was an heretic, and could not by any reasons or
persuasion be reduced from her errors, though divers
Priests had talked with her and much labour had been
spent in vain about her. But no doubt she was reserved
for Father Ouldcorne, for he being sent unto her, within
a few days brought her to be a perfect Catholic; and
afterwards she continued ever so devout that she did
more good than any Catholic in all the country, and
with her Father Ouldcorne did chiefly remain for sixteen
or seventeen years together. In which time of his abode
in those parts it is not easy to be believed how many
obstinate heretics he converted, how many weak Catholics
he confirmed, how many scholars he sent over to the
Seminaries and religious women to monasteries, how many
houses he brought to that degree of devotion that he
might and did settle Priests in them. Indeed, I may
safely say of him, without amplification, that <q>in illis
partibus totas fere fundavit rexitque ecclesias domesticas.</q><note place='foot'>He founded and governed nearly all the domestic churches in those parts.</note>
Yea, in my knowledge, he assisted Father Garnett also
with yearly provision of money, procured from his own
acquaintance, towards his charges and maintenance of
others, when the Society grew to be there of greater
number. All the chiefest gentlemen and best Catholics of
the country where he remained, and the countries adjoining,
depended upon his advice and counsel, and he was
infatigable in his journeys. I neither do nor have known
any one Priest in England that did go so many journeys
as he did, especially towards the latter end of his time,
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
when he grew to be acquainted in so many places, and so
much esteemed in all places, that he could never almost
stay three days at home but he should be sent for.
</p>

<p>
Yet was he for many years together of very weak
health, proceeding partly of his pains-taking and partly of
study, unto which he was very much addicted, and spent
in it almost all the time that he had free from needful
business. By which means about some eight or nine years
ago he did spit blood in great abundance, but being
very carefully tended and provided of all helps needful
in such a case, he recovered; yet afterwards, with his
like labours and earnest manner of preaching (in which
he had a very good talent, though his voice were somewhat
hoarse and painful unto himself, yet audible unto his
hearers), he fell again to spit blood three or four times,
which brought him to that weakness that no man thought
he could recover. And being much consumed, he grew
to have a cancer in his mouth, which afterwards was
miraculously cured, as himself did tell me the story in
this very manner.
</p>

<p>
When the physicians did give their judgment that
the cancer could not be cured, but that he must
have some parts of the roof of his mouth cut out,
and some bones also, he resolved first to try what
help he could have from St. Winifred, a notable Virgin
and Martyr, who hath in those parts a well famous for
many miracles, where she was beheaded. Thither did
Father Ouldcorne resolve to go on pilgrimage before he
tried any further physic. And in his journey coming to
a Catholic house, where he meant to celebrate, he found
upon the altar divers relics, and amongst the rest a little
stone of St. Winifred's Well with drops of blood upon it
(as many of the stones have that are taken up in that
well and in the current that runs from it). This stone
Father Ouldcorne took and went aside into a place by
himself, and fell earnestly to his prayers, desiring St.
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
Winifred's help for his health, if so it were best for the
service of God. Then he put the stone into his mouth
and held it there some time, and behold within half an
hour his mouth was perfectly well. He went forward to
St. Winifred's Well, and there also recovered the strength
of his whole body, and returned home so strong and in
such sort that all wondered exceedingly. And after this
time<note place='foot'>(As himself did constantly affirm unto me). <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> he was more able to endure pains than he was
before; and whereas once a year, commonly about the
same time, he did usually grow weak and enter as it
were into his consumption together, he used then no
other physic but to go to St. Winifred's Well, whence
he ever returned with perfect strength and health, which
lasted him until that time twelvemonth again. All which
particulars I set down as himself did recount them unto me.
</p>

<p>
Thus he continued his labours until it pleased Almighty
God to call him to receive a full reward for his so faithful
service and fruitful endeavours: at which time he was near
fifty years old.<note place='foot'>And his head full of grey hairs, the rather occasioned by his much loss of
blood before mentioned. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> The manner of his apprehension with
Father Garnett, also of his strict examinations and cruel
tortures received in the Tower, I have set down in the
former chapters, and in this chapter I have declared how
he was carried down to Worcester and there condemned
and executed in the place which of all others he would
have chosen, if he might have had his wishes, <q>Domino
voluntatem faciente timentium se.</q><note place='foot'>Our Lord doing the will of those who fear Him.</note>
</p>

<p>
After his death it pleased Almighty God to testify
his fervent charity and received crown of glory by these
two notable signs. For, first, the place where his bowels
were cast into the fire (as the custom is), being in the
open field and subject to rain and all injury of weather,
yet did the fire continue burning there, and could not
be extinguished for sixteen or seventeen days together,
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
until at last the town of Worcester, fearing a miracle,
did send to put it out with violence. But they could not
hinder the people from seeing the wonder to be great,
and more than natural, giving unto Catholics just cause
to remember with what zeal of burning charity he had
for the like number of years sought to enkindle their hearts
with heavenly fire, like the true disciple of Him that said,
<q>Ignem veni mittere in terram et quid volo nisi ut ardeat.</q><note place='foot'><q>I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I but that it be
kindled?</q> (St. Luke xii. 49).</note>
</p>

<p>
In like manner there was seen to grow within the
court of Henlip (which is Mr. Abington his house, where
Father Garnett and Father Ouldcorne were taken, and
where Father Ouldcorne had for many years together
deserved a crown of glory), a formal crown of grass, both
higher and of different colour from the rest of the grass
round about it. And the wonder was the more in respect
that the gates of the house being broken down at the time
of the search, and so continually standing open, and both
swine and other kind of cattle coming in, yet none of
them would either eat of that grass or did tread upon
it to deface it; yea, when neighbours did cut it down,
in like manner as they had extinguished the fire, yet did
it grow up again in like height and form as it was before,
and so continued to the great admiration of all the country
thereabouts. But it is to me much greater marvel that
they will not open their eyes and see <q>quam mirabilis
Deus in sanctis suis.</q><note place='foot'>How <q>God is wonderful in His Saints</q> (Ps. xxii. 36).</note> I hope in God the time will come
when the city of Worcester will see and acknowledge both
the burning charity with which blessed Father Ouldcorne
lived and died amongst them, and the crown of glory
which he hath received at the hand of God for his faith
so truly kept and his course so happily consummate.
His life was holy; his death saintly. God send us part
of his blessed merits and intercession.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV.
Of The Execution Of Father Garnett, With A
Brief Relation Of His Life.<note place='foot'>And of the signs by which it hath pleased God to show his innocency and
martyrdom. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note></head>

<p>
After the condemnation of Father Garnett and the
execution of Father Ouldcorne, they kept Father Garnett
still in the Tower, to the marvel of many, from the time of
his arraignment, which was the twenty-eighth of March,
until the third of May. In the meantime there was of
purpose spread many false rumours of his, that forsooth
he would yield and go to church with heretics, and that
they should see him preach publicly heretical doctrine, and
such like; all which things God knows were far from his
thoughts, as he showed by his great constancy, and in
express words also when he came to die. But this was
done to diminish the great and worthy opinion which was
conceived of him generally, and to cause some bad
rumours to be spread of him in other countries before his
death, that the truth itself, when it came to be opened by
his constant suffering, might have the less credit, at least
in some men's minds, where the contrary prejudicate
opinion should be before settled.
</p>

<p>
All this time, which God of His gracious providence
gave unto the holy man for his better preparation and
perfecting of his fervent and religious desires, his enemies
also gave him good occasion to increase his merits, often
soliciting him<note place='foot'>To draw some other great person into. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> to declare who was intended for Protector
by the Catholics if the Plot had gone forward, whereby it
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
was thought likely that the Earl of Northumberland would
have been deeply touched. And to this end it was
constantly affirmed by some that knew much how things
passed, that both life and favour were often and earnestly
offered him, if he would have yielded in that point. But
Father Garnett was far from any such base and unworthy
mind: neither could he ever be brought to repair his own
liberty with the ruins of others.<note place='foot'>This may be considered whether it be convenient to be left out. <hi rend='italic'>In
marg. in another hand.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Wherefore when it was plainly seen that there was
no hope to draw him to anything unlawful or unfit for
a Religious Priest, it was then determined presently that
he should suffer. And the day was assigned to be the
first of May, which being told unto Father Garnett,
he misliked the choice they had made of that day, as
well in regard it hath not been usual to put any to
death upon such great Feasts, as for that it hath long
time been a custom in England upon that day in the
morning early, for the people to go into the fields and
come home with green boughs in their hands in sign of
joy, and to spend most of that day in triumph and
pastime. To which effect Father Garnett made answer,
<q>What, will they make a May game of me?</q> which
words of his (as it afterwards proved) he was by God's
providence directed to speak. For when it was told to the
Council what he said, they saw it was not fit, and altered
the day from Thursday, which was May-day, until the
Saturday following, which was the Invention of the Holy
Cross, and the day no doubt assigned by Almighty God
for his martyrdom; for, of all other days in that season,
the martyr himself was most affected unto that, having
ever had a special devotion unto the Cross and Passion of
Christ; wherefore as he misliked the unfit choice of the
other day, so he rejoiced exceedingly at this election, and
prepared himself gladly to find this cross which God
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
would send him upon that day, and by that cross to
find the way to Heaven. He showed himself a true
disciple and follower of the Apostle <q>et gloriatus est
in cruce Domini nostri Jesu Christi, in quo est salus,
vita et resurrectio ejus, per quem salvatus et liberatus
est.</q><note place='foot'>And he gloried in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Whom is his
salvation, life, and resurrection, by Whom he is saved and delivered.</note>
</p>

<p>
The manner of his preparation we cannot learn, all
things being kept so close in that most close and strict
prison, where none but his only keeper could possibly come
to him; and that keeper a most malicious naughty fellow,
as before hath been showed. But we may well judge of
his preparation by the effects of his well prepared mind
and his cheerful carriage, which, in so grave a man, was a
sign of great peace and contentment of mind. When the
desired day was come, Father Garnett was brought down
from his chamber in the Tower, where first there met him
one of the cooks of the house, who used to provide him
his meat,<note place='foot'>Dinner. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and this man took his leave of him saying,
<q>Farewell, good sir;</q> upon whom Father Garnett looking
with a pleasant smiling countenance, said, <q>Farewell, good
friend Tom, this day I will save thee a labour to provide
my dinner.</q> And going a little further towards the hurdle,
there met him also the Lieutenant's wife to take her leave,
who said, <q>God be with you, and comfort you, good
Mr. Garnett, I will pray for you.</q> To whom, with a joyful
countenance, he gave thanks, saying, <q>I thank you, good
madam, and for your prayers, you may keep them at this
time; and if it pleaseth God to give me perseverance, I
will not forget you in my prayers.</q> Then being brought
unto the hurdle, there he was laid as the order is, having a
black cloak somewhat long upon his other clothes, and a
hat on his head. All the way as he was drawn (with three
horses), he held his hands together, lifted up somewhat
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
towards Heaven, and kept his eyes shut for the most part,
as a man in deep contemplation.
</p>

<p>
The place of the execution was St. Paul's churchyard,
on the west end,<note place='foot'>Side. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> over against the Bishop's house; provided
so by God, that as by his virtuous life and doctrine he
had confuted heresy, so by his constant death he might
confound both it and the teachers thereof. In that place
there was a great scaffold made, and a gibbet in the midst
of the scaffold. And such multitudes of people, noble and
ignoble, so many standings set up by carpenters to hire
out for money, that a mere place to stand on would cost
twelvepence well; and the party from whom I chiefly
have many of these particulars (being a Priest of great
credit and estimation) was glad to give twelvepence only
to stand upon a wall. All windows were full, yea, the tops
of houses full of people, so that it is not known the like
hath been at any execution. When he was taken up from
the hurdle, his arms being still unbound, there met him
the Dean of St. Paul's and of Winchester,<note place='foot'>Dr. John Overal, afterwards Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and Dr.
George Abbot, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> with a
company of other ministers. And the Dean of St. Paul's
said unto him (both he and the rest having their hats in
their hands and with great show of reverence), <q>Mr.
Garnett, I am sent unto you from His Majesty, to will
you, that now being in the last hour of your mortal life,
you will perform the duty of a true subject, to which you
are obliged by the laws of God and nature; and therefore
to disclose such treasons as you know intended towards
His Majesty's danger and the commonwealth.</q> By this
it may appear they had often laboured him to confess
something, and could never get anything in that kind,
which moved them now again to make this last trial. To
this Father Garnett answered, <q>Mr. Dean, it may please
you to tell His Majesty, that I have been arraigned, and
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
what could be laid to my charge, I have there answered,
and said as much as I could; so that in this place I have
no more to say.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then the Dean and other ministers began to persuade
him to a true and lively faith (meaning their own solifidian
doctrine), but in this he cut them off quickly,
desiring them not to trouble themselves, nor him; and
said that for his estate of soul he needed not their instructions;
he came prepared and was resolved. Which two last
words are of themselves sufficient to convince all the
slanders his enemies would fain have imposed upon
him, and to declare what he had done in his private
prison, whereof as yet we cannot learn the particulars.
Then he was brought upon the scaffold, where there was
both the Sheriffs of London, the Recorder, with the Deans
and Doctors before mentioned, and some other petty
officers, as also some Catholics of reckoning, and well-wishers,<note place='foot'>Staying for him. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
all which he saluted very kindly and cheerfully.
</p>

<p>
And first he asked whether there was not some place to
pray;<note place='foot'>And perceiving that there was no place of retiring, he began to speak of
the present festivity of the Cross. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> but the Recorder began to say unto him, that he
and others were there by order from His Majesty, to bring
him to remembrance of his treason, and that he should
acknowledge he was justly condemned, and ask the King's
forgiveness. To which he answered, he had not committed
any treason nor offence against His Majesty, nor
was ever guilty of the Powder Treason in the least degree,
but had earnestly dissuaded and sought to hinder both
that and all other attempts against His Majesty; neither
could they condemn him for anything, but for not opening
the secret of confession, in which only he had knowledge
of that Powder Treason, and in which he had done
according to his function, and therefore could not justly
be condemned for it; neither had any ways willingly
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
offended His Majesty. But so far forth as this concealing
of the treason (unto which he was bound in conscience) did
any ways offend His Majesty or the State, he did ask
them forgiveness with all his heart.
</p>

<p>
Thereupon the Recorder taking hold, said to the hearers,
<q>Do you hear, gentlemen? He asketh the King forgiveness
for the Powder Treason.</q> To which Father Garnett
answered, <q>You do me wrong: for I have no cause to ask
forgiveness for that whereof I was never guilty, nor was
privy to it in such sort that it may justly be imputed to me
for concealing it.</q> The Recorder then would gladly have
made good his former speech with facing down the Father,
and said: <q>What! will you deny your own hand? We
have it under your hand, that you knew of it by other
means than confession, that Greenway told you of it by
way of consultation, and that Catesby and Greenway
came together to be resolved of you.</q> <q>No,</q> said the
Father, <q>Mr. Catesby never told me of any particular.
And for Mr. Greenway, I knew it only, as I have said,
by confession, which therefore I could not lawfully open,
until now that I had leave so to do. Neither would I
have named him as I have done,<note place='foot'>In the matter. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> but lest any might
think him guilty of counselling or furthering in the matter,
and<note place='foot'>Further to be touched than he is. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> to the end the very truth might be known, because
false reports make him thought more guilty than he is.
What is under my hand I will not deny, but you shall
never show my hand contrary to what I have spoken.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Recorder answered, <q>You do but equivocate, and
if you will deny it, after your death we will publish your
own hand, that the world may see your false dealing.</q> The
Father answered, <q>This is no time to talk of equivocation,
neither do I equivocate. But in troth, in troth, you shall
not find my hand otherwise than I have said.</q> Which
double asseveration did satisfy the hearers much, though
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
he would not be satisfied that was resolved and prepared
to contradict. Wherefore the Recorder said to one of
his followers, <q>Let him see his own handwriting.</q> <q>You
cannot,</q> saith the Father, <q>show me any such writing of
my hand.</q> Then he that should have had the note, said it
was not there; it was left at home (at which divers of the
standers-by laughed in their sleeves). <q>No,</q> saith the
Father, <q>neither here nor at home you have any such.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then they asked him whether he had anything to say
unto the people. He answered his voice was low and
himself weak; he doubted they could not hear him. But
yet he<note place='foot'>Went to the side of the scaffold. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> turned him to the people and said, <q>Upon this day
is recorded the Invention of the Cross of Christ; and upon
this day I thank God I have found my cross, by which I
hope to end all the crosses of my life, and to rest in the
next by the grace and merits of my Blessed Saviour. As
for the treasons which are laid against me, I protest now at
my death that I am not guilty of them, neither had knowledge
of the Powder but in confession, and then I utterly
disliked it and earnestly dissuaded it. Yea, I protest upon
my soul I should have abhorred it ever, though it had
succeeded. And I am sorry with all my heart that any
Catholics had ever any such intention, knowing that such
attempts are not allowable, and to my own knowledge
contrary to the Pope's mind. And, therefore, I wish all
Catholics to be quiet, and not to be moved by any difficulties
to the raising of tumults, but to possess their souls
in peace. And God will not be forgetful of them, or of
His promise, but will send them help and comfort when it
is most to His glory and to their good.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then some one that stood near unto him, seeking
to interrupt him, and saying, <q>But, Mr. Garnett, were
not you married to Mrs. Ann Vaux?</q> thereupon he,
turning himself from the people to those about him,
said, <q>That honourable gentlewoman hath great wrong
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
by such false reports. And for my own part, as I have
been always free from such crimes, so I may protest
for her upon my conscience that I think her to be a perfect
pure virgin, if any other in England or otherwise alive.
She is a virtuous good gentlewoman, and, therefore, to
impute any such thing unto her cannot proceed but of
malice.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then, no more being said unto him, he prepared
himself to execution, and asked if he might be permitted
to pray, to which was answered, he might. Then he kneeled
down at the ladder-foot, and there prayed for a good space
in devout and religious manner. Then he helped to strip
himself of his cloth unto his shirt, which was somewhat
long, and himself had also sewed down the sides thereof
almost to the bottom, that the wind might not blow it up,
which was noted by many as a sign of great modesty
in the Father. About that time a minister seemed again
to insinuate himself as desirous to speak unto him in way
of exhortation, but the Father desired him to hold himself
contented, and not to trouble him any further.
</p>

<p>
And being upon the ladder, after he had made the
sign of the Cross and desired the prayers of all good
Catholics, one said unto him aloud, <q>Mr. Garnett, it is
expected you should recant from your religion and
become a Protestant,</q> for so it was given out that he
would do, and afterwards preach at Paul's Cross. The
Father answered, <q>God forbid. I had never any such
meaning, but ever meant to die a true and perfect
Catholic.</q> And then, looking upon the people with
a pious and undaunted countenance, he wished them to
consider well the state of their souls, assuring them, upon
his conscience and salvation, there was no other way for
their eternal bliss but to live and die in the profession of
the Catholic faith. Then said the Dean of St. Paul's,
<q>But, Mr. Garnett, we are all Catholics.</q> <q>No, no,</q> said
Father Garnett, <q>you are not, for such are only Catholics
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
as live in unity and profession of one faith, under one
supreme head of God's Church, which is the Pope's Holiness,
and you must be all of the Catholic Roman Church,
or you cannot be saved.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then he prayed for the King, Queen, Prince, the
Council, and the whole State. Then he desired the
hangman to give him warning before he did cast him off
the ladder. Then, making the sign of the Cross with <q>In
nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti,</q> he said, <q>Adoramus
te, Christe, et benedicimus tibi, quia per sanctam
crucem tuam redemisti mundum;</q><note place='foot'><q>We adore Thee, O Christ, and we bless Thee, because by Thy holy
Cross Thou hast redeemed the world.</q></note> then, <q>Maria Mater
gratiæ, Mater misericordiæ, tu nos ab hoste protege et
horâ mortis suscipe;</q><note place='foot'><q>Mary, Mother of grace, Mother of mercy, protect us from the enemy,
and receive us at the hour of death.</q></note> then, <q>In manus tuas, Domine,
commendo spiritum meum,</q><note place='foot'><q>Into Thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit.</q></note> which he repeated twice or
thrice; then,<note place='foot'>Again, <q>Maria mater gratiæ, Mater misericordiæ, tu nos,</q> etc. <hi rend='italic'>Erased
in Orig.</hi></note> <q>Per crucis hoc signum (blessing himself)
fugiat procul omne malignum. Infige crucem tuam in
corde meo, Domine;</q><note place='foot'><q>By this sign of the Cross, may all that is wicked fly far away. Fix Thy
Cross in my heart, O Lord.</q></note> then returned again to <q>Maria
Mater gratiæ, Mater misericordiæ, tu nos ab hoste,</q>
&amp;c. Then he told the hangman he was ready, and
being desirous to carry the Cross with him out of
the world imprinted in his heart,<note place='foot'>(Unto which he was so much devoted). <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> he crossed his arms
over his heart upon his breast, and so was cast off the
ladder, and his arms continued so across as he had placed
them (not being bound, nor he making any struggling at
all with death) until he had rendered his spirit to his
Redeemer.
</p>

<p>
Neither was he cut down before he was perfectly
dead. For the people was so much moved with his
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
modesty, and so altered from their former hard conceits
of him by the sight of his constancy, and by his protestation
of innocency at his death, that they prevented
the hangman with a loud cry that he might not cut
him down too soon. Who thereupon, having permitted
him to hang awhile, would then have cut him down when
he presumed him to be half-dead; but the people cried out
again, <q>Hold, hold,</q> and so again the third time, not
permitting him to be cut down until he was thoroughly
dead. Yea, and one of the citizens took him by the legs
and pulled him to put him out of his pain, and that he
might not be cut down alive. Which kind of favours are
nothing usual when the people do presume men die for
treason, and were not used to the gentlemen that suffered
before, although men of good sort, and much beloved
and esteemed before this enterprise.
</p>

<p>
And it was much marvelled how the people durst
do this so publicly, seeing the State so generally bent
against Father Garnett in this cause. But most of
them proceeded much further than this. For when
he was cut up and his bowels cast into the fire, and
his heart pulled out and showed unto the people
with these words, which are ever used in such cases,
<q>Behold the heart of a traitor,</q> there was not heard any
applause, or those that cried, <q>God save the King,</q> which
is always usual when the heart or head is holden up in
that kind.
</p>

<p>
Yea, so strange and unexpected an alteration there
was in the very heretics themselves that some of them
said, without doubt he was in Heaven; others said,
<q>He died like a Saint;</q> others, that he looked not
like a contriver of treason. Yea, and some ministers
themselves were heard to say that questionless his soul
was in Heaven. And, generally, the people went away
much satisfied of his innocency and sanctity.
</p>

<p>
The Priest, of whom I spake before, who saw and
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
heard most of these things, going down from his standing,
went under the scaffold in desire to get some drops of
his blood, which he did, and found divers there hunting
for the same prey. Besides, his shirt was presently gotten
by a person of great account, and most of his apparel
also was redeemed by several persons, and are now
esteemed of more than their weight in gold.
</p>

<p>
One marvellous thing happened whilst his body was
dividing on the block, about a straw or ear of corn,
which did strangely leap out of the basket into which
his head and quarters were cast as they were cut up. This
straw did leap into the hand of a Catholic, who stood by
with great desire to get some part of the martyr's blood,
but durst not be seen to take it. But, for that the
chiefest marvel that concerneth this straw was not discerned
at the first, but was discovered some days after, to the
great comfort of Catholics and wonder of many: therefore
I reserve it for the next chapter, as also some other marvel
seen about Father Garnett's head.
</p>

<p>
Now, therefore, having declared how he finished his
holy life,<note place='foot'>With a happy death. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> I will here set down so much of his whole
course therein as I could learn from some of those that
have been very inward with him, that it may the more
plainly appear how his religious virtues did prepare and
perfect him to this last conflict and conquest over the
world.
</p>

<p>
He was born in the county of Derby. His parents were
well esteemed, and well able to maintain the charge of
their family. His father was given to learning, insomuch
that he made profession thereof, and taught Free School
in the next shire-town, which was of Nottingham.<note place='foot'>The chapter is unfinished.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI.
Of The State Of Catholics After Father Garnett
His Execution: How God Did Comfort Them
With Some Miraculous Events, And How Their
Zeal Increased, Notwithstanding The Increase
Of Persecution.</head>

<p>
It was certainly expected by the Puritans and enemies of
the Catholic cause that, together with the death of Father
Garnett, the hopes also and courage of Catholics would
have died, and that, when they should see so chief a man
so publicly arraigned and executed under the title of so
foul a matter, none would after that adventure to deal with
the Society, which was the principal mark at which they
aimed, with all their solemnities and unwonted preparation
in the foresaid passages both of his trial and death. But
the wisdom of God (against which the wit of man doth
labour in vain), having determined to conform His elected
servants unto His own image, and that as well by pressures
and crosses in this world as by rewards and crowns of glory
in the next, hath ever used a contrary course to the
expectation of His enemies, and doth not permit His
Church by persecutions to be dejected, but doth rather
dilate the palm-tree when it is suppressed, <q>et facit cum
tentatione proventum ut possimus sustinere, educens nobis
aquam de petra, oleumque de saxo durissimo.</q><note place='foot'>And makes <q>with the temptation issue, that</q> we <q>may be able to
bear it</q> (1 Cor. x. 13), bringing forth for us <q>water out of the rock</q>
(Ps. lxxvii. 16), <q>and oil out of the hardest stone</q> (Deut. xxxii. 13).</note> And He
that doth daily make the most barren and stony mountains
to bring forth the sweetest oil for our corporal uses, much
more for the good of our souls doth use to make sweet the
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
yoke of persecutions with the oil of His grace and mercy,
<q>computrescere faciens jugum a facie olei.</q><note place='foot'>Making <q>the yoke</q> to <q>putrefy at the presence of the oil</q> (Is. xi. 27).</note>
</p>

<p>
Therefore much otherwise than was expected, this holy
seed of Father Garnett's slaughtered body falling upon
the earth did bring forth great fruit. His mortified and
divided parts did quicken and unite the minds of many
that were before distracted with fears and uncertain
reports, and his innocent blood did water the field of
Christ in this country, and brought forth a plentiful
harvest; yea, it did mollify the hearts of some that were
before very hard to believe well of the Society, touching
these imposed crimes. For although very many Catholics
were before well satisfied of Father Garnett his innocency,
and especially those that had dealings with him could not
be ignorant how far he was from any such attempts, that
laboured so much to suppress the least disorder in that
kind; yet generally the heretics were otherwise persuaded,
giving credit to those reports that were everywhere bruited
of him. And some friends also stood doubtful how far he
might be touched therein, upon the constant asseveration
of his guiltiness in the cause, and that also given out by
persons of no mean account. But when they heard him
clear himself so fully at his arraignment from all concurrence
or connivency in the matter, and perceived plainly
he could and would have said much more in that place,
if he had not been so often interrupted of purpose to
put him out, and to disturb both his own memory<note place='foot'>The memory of the prisoner. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> and
the understanding of his hearers. And when at his death
they viewed his innocency, patience, and religious manner
of suffering, and saw most apparently both by the one
and the other that no one of the Society was to be
touched with any help or furtherance, or any willing assent
unto that conspiracy, nor any one of the Company<note place='foot'>Whosoever but he. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> have
had the least knowledge thereof by any means whatsoever,
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
but himself and that one Father from whom he had it, and
they restrained by the secret of confession from opening it
to others, and dissuading and hindering the same by all
lawful means they could use. These things being plainly
seen, and to be testified by so many witnesses as were
there present both at his judgment and death, did fully
satisfy all doubts, and clear the conceits of such as did
before suspend their judgments of him. But especially
when by his great patience and constancy seen at his
death, his rare virtues did more appear, and his lamp,
<q>quæ erat lucerna lucens et ardens,</q><note place='foot'>Which <q>was a burning and a shining light</q> (St. John v. 35).</note> did show itself so
much the more brightly, his earthly vessel being broken,
to the confusion of his enemies, and increase of comfort
and courage to the faithful soldiers of our true Gideon.
</p>

<p>
Then, as I related in the last chapter, not only the
Catholics and his friends that were beholders were much
confirmed, and their tears turned into triumph for the
victory which this champion of God had gotten of the
slanders of the world and malice of sin and heresy, but
many also of his enemies did bear witness of his innocency,
<q>dicentes, Verè hic homo justus erat,</q><note place='foot'><q>Saying, Indeed this was a just man</q> (St. Luke xxiii. 47).</note> and wished
their souls with his. Such force hath truth, that it cannot
be conquered, and innocency, that it cannot be confounded.
Well may it be oppressed for a time, but it
cannot be suppressed; <q>aporiamur, sed non destituimur,
persecutionem patimur sed non derelinquimur,
dejicimur sed non perimus.</q><note place='foot'><q>We suffer tribulation, but are not distressed: we are straitened, but are
not destitute: we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken: we are cast down,
but we perish not</q> (2 Cor. iv. 8, 9).</note> Yea rather, in the greatest
needs our merciful God doth send the greatest comforts,
and where His enemies do think most to triumph over
Him, there doth He ofttimes manifest the truth, and set
forth His own glory and the innocency of His servants
with most apparent signs.
</p>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<p>
And so it happened in this case of Father Garnett: for
whereas the Fathers that suffered before in Queen Elizabeth's
time were well known to all men to suffer only for
their conscience, insomuch that although some matter or
other were ever feigned to make it seem that they suffered
for treason, yet the fictions were so palpable of matters
never intended, nor so much as thought or heard of before
the time they were objected, and those that were said to be
joint-conspirators ofttimes so mere strangers that they never
had seen or heard of one the other before: these apparent
contradictions did make so manifest their innocent cause,
that there need no divine testimonies to a truth so evident.
But in this latter cause of Father Garnett, the case was
somewhat different in the opinion of many, though his
innocency the same, and the equity of his cause equal with
the former. In this, it was very true, there was a real
ground upon which the adversaries might raise a pretence
of seeming truth in their accusation. There was a great
and dangerous conspiracy intended and plotted and
proceeded in by those gentlemen of whom I have before
discoursed. Divers of these gentlemen were known to
Father Garnett, and some of them had often used his
help and the help of others of the Society in their
spiritual affairs. And this matter also they had at
length opened a little before it should have been
executed unto two of the Society in the secret of
confession, as I have before declared. Therefore in
this case Almighty God did think it more needful
in His divine providence to give testimony of His
servant's innocency than in former times, when the
cause itself was so plain, that it could not be contradicted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Of the miraculous straw.</note>
The first sign by which it pleased God to show the
merit and glory of this His martyr was
concerning his relics, which were eagerly sought for by many
Catholics at the very time of his martyrdom. Amongst the
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
which there was one young man,<note place='foot'>This was John Wilkinson, who afterwards became a student at St Omers,
and on his death-bed in that College dictated a narrative of Father Garnett's
execution and the finding of the straw, which is given by Father More, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Prov. Angl. S. J.</hi>, lib. vii., n. 35.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> who<note place='foot'>Is now a scholar in the English College at St. Omers. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> stood by the block
where the martyr's body was cut up, with great desire at
least to get some drop of his holy blood.<note place='foot'>In such sort as it might not be espied. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> And whilst he
had these thoughts, not daring to take where he desired
for fear he might be espied, it fortuned that the hangman
having cut off the martyr's head and showed it to the
people (as the custom is), he cast it into a basket standing
there of purpose, full of straw, to hold the head and
quarters when they were divided. Out of this basket did
leap a straw, or ear void of corn, in strange manner
into the hand of this young man, which he beholding,
and seeing some blood upon it, kept it with great care,
and no little joy that he had obtained his desire. He
carried it away safely and delivered it unto a Catholic
gentlewoman<note place='foot'>Her name was Griffin.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> of his acquaintance, who kept it in a
reliquary with great devotion; and after three or four
days,<note place='foot'>Two or three months. <hi rend='italic'>Interlined in Orig</hi>. Wilkinson himself says,
<q>Paucis post diebus.</q></note> a devout Catholic gentleman coming thither, she
showed him the bloody straw, which he was also glad
to see and reverence; but beholding the same more
curiously than the others had done, he saw a perfect
face, as if it had been painted, upon one of the husks
of the empty ear, and showed the same unto the company,
which they all did plainly behold, and with no small
wonder, but with much greater joy did acknowledge the
mighty hand of God, Who can and doth often use the
meanest creatures to set forth His glory, and is able
both out of stones and straws to raise a sufficient defence
for His faithful servants.
</p>

<p>
They put up the straw again with great admiration,
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
and kept it now with much more reverence and devotion
than before. This was quickly published to many of the
chiefest Catholics about London, who much desiring to
see this wonder, it was carried unto divers, who all are
witnesses of this truth. At length it came to the Council's
ear, and some of them desiring much to see it, it was
granted, being now in the keeping of a great person,<note place='foot'>Father More says it was the Spanish Ambassador, and he gives an
attestation of the Baron de Hobocque, dated in 1625, attesting that he had
seen it in 1606, when he was in London as Ambassador of the Princes of the
Netherlands.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> but
with promise to have it safely restored; so that some of
them did see it, and did much admire it, affirming that
it must needs be more than natural. Others after desired
to see it and to seize upon it, because now the fame did
grow so great of this image of Father Garnett drawn by
the hand of God, whose image and memory they sought
to deface in all they could, that they feared the evidence
of the miracle would plead against their proceedings and
prove him innocent whom they had punished as guilty.
Therefore the Bishop of Canterbury<note place='foot'>Dr. Richard Bancroft.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> sought to have
the miraculous straw into his hands, but it was denied,
and none would acknowledge where it was to be found.
He learned out the party to whom the keeping of it
was first committed, and sent for her<note place='foot'>The gentlewoman's. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> husband, who was
a known Catholic and a virtuous man. He examined
him strictly how it came to pass, and where the straw
was. The Catholic affirmed the truth of the thing, and
described it unto him in words; but said it was not now
in his keeping, and he knew not where to find it. And
when they could get no other answer of him, they committed
him to prison; but afterwards, having sundry and
great friends in the Court, he got out upon bonds to
appear again at certain days' warning.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime it happened that two were miraculously
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
cured by application of the same straw. One was
a gentlewoman in great peril of her life by danger of
childbirth, who, when she had sustained long and painful
travail and could not be delivered of her burthen, and
now was out of hope of life, unless she might obtain
some help from God, some of her friends made earnest
means to get this holy straw to bring unto her; which
being obtained, and the straw brought and applied with
great reverence, presently she received help, and was
delivered by the mighty hand of God and merits of the
martyr, whom no midwife's skill or endeavours could
help before.
</p>

<p>
Another was the gentlewoman herself who first had
this miraculous relic delivered her to keep. For she
being very much subject to sickness, and sometimes in
such extremity therewith that you would not think she
could be able to live an hour, it happened that in one
of her extremest fits, when she could find no medicine
or means that could bring her any ease, she earnestly
desired a special friend to make suit for the straw to be
returned unto her for a small time, which was granted;
and as soon as it came (she receiving it with great devotion
and reverence) she presently found ease, and within half
an hour was so perfectly well that she rose from her bed,
and went to entertain some strangers that then were in
the house, and <q>erat una ex discumbentibus.</q><note place='foot'><q>Was one of them that were at table</q> (St. John xii. 2).</note>
</p>

<p>
This sudden and strange cure of hers being spoken
of by divers Catholics, it came out to be known unto the
Council, who sent again for the husband of the gentlewoman,
and took this new occasion to commit him the
second time to prison.
</p>

<p>
The Council afterwards understanding that this miraculous
picture in the straw had been showed to divers
painters in London, they sent for the painters, and willed
them to make the like portrait to that which they had
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
seen in a like empty ear of corn; but they all answered
it was not possible for them to do it: neither could the
draught of that face, in so little a room and so loose a
groundwork as that empty ear, be otherwise drawn than
by supernatural power. And this testimony they gave of
it that had both skill to judge and no will to favour the
Catholic cause (being in opinion heretics), but only convinced
in their understanding by the evidence of the miracle.<note place='foot'>Father Richard Blount, in a letter dated Nov. 8, 1606, says&mdash;<q>A Catholic
person in London having kept, since the execution of Mr. Garnett, a straw that
was embued in his blood, now these days past, being viewed again by the party
and others, they espy in the ear of the straw a perfect face of a man dead, his
eyes, nose, beard, and neck so lively representing Mr. Garnett, as not only in
my eyes, but in the eyes of others which knew him, it doth lively represent
him. This hath been seen by Catholics and Protestants of the best sort and
divers others, who much admire it, &amp;c. This you may boldly report, for,
besides ourselves, a thousand others are witnesses of it.</q> And in another letter,
dated March, 1607, <q>It cannot be a thing natural or artificial. The sprinkling
of blood hath made so plain a face, so well proportioned, so lively shadowed,
as no art in such a manner is able to counterfeit the like.</q> Father More,
whose history was published in 1660, says that the straw was kept in the Jesuit
College at Liége. The last mention we have met of it is by the Abbé Feller,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire Historique</hi>, which was published at Liége in 1797, and
therefore after the suppression of the Society, <q>L'épi est aujourdhui entre les
mains d'un de mes amis, qui le conserve soigneusement</q> (Art. Garnett).</note>
</p>

<p>
Another marvellous thing which it pleased Almighty
God to show for a public testimony of the glory which
blessed Father Garnett now possesseth, is a visible and
apparent circle of red about his head in the form of a
crown, which was and is to be seen about his head, where
it is set up, as the custom is, with the heads of others that
died for treason. This hath had so many witnesses as
would go to behold it, which were not a few, and besides,
they did affirm that his face did continue so comely and
with so pleasing a countenance, as it seemed rather the
head of a man alive than separated from the body; and
all his quarters also so purely white, that it was much
admired by all that did behold them.
</p>

<p>
To these I may adjoin the crown of grass which did
grow in Mr. Abington his court, in the house where both
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
blessed Father Garnett and blessed Father Ouldcorne
were taken, which may be taken as a sign of his glory
and crown of immortality as well as Father Ouldcorne's.
And of this I spake sufficiently in the last chapter but
one. I could hereunto add a vision which both of these
blessed Fathers had in the Tower the 7th of March before
their martyrdom, the very night before they were hung
upon the torture. It happened in this manner. Father
Ouldcorne in his sleep did seem to behold a very sumptuous
throne set up, with great care and cost adorned, at
which sight when Father Ouldcorne much admired, not
knowing to what end it should be prepared, it seemed unto
him that there entered into the room the most<note place='foot'>Our. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> Reverend
Father General, and with him some other ancient Fathers;
and that Father Ouldcorne did demand of Father General
what should be the meaning or intention of that throne so
much adorned; and that the Father should answer that
both Father Garnett and himself should presently be professed.
To which Father Ouldcorne made answer that
Father Garnett was already professed. Then Father
General replied, he would now have him make a more
excellent profession than before. This vision Father
Ouldcorne the next morning told unto his keeper, desiring
he would tell it unto Father Garnett, which he performed;
and Father Garnett assured him the very same thing, in
the same manner, had also that night appeared unto him.
But Father Ouldcorne did see it again the next night after.
This was so generally spoken of in the Tower about that
time, that if there had been no other means afterwards to
know the truth, that alone had been sufficient to publish it.
</p>

<p>
Now, when the other foresaid marvels were seen about
his head after his martyrdom, and that the miraculous
image of the straw was visibly seen by many Catholics,
and generally known to all, you may well think that
Catholics were greatly animated, receiving now, in their
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
greatest distress, such comforts from the merciful hand of
God, <q>qui est Pater misericordiarum et Deus totius consolationis,
qui consolatur nos in omni tribulatione nostrâ.</q><note place='foot'>Who is <q>the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, Who comforteth
us in all our tribulation</q> (2 Cor. i. 3, 4).</note>
And, indeed, the effect of these heavenly comforts was
such in the hearts of poor afflicted Catholics, but especially
the force of the martyr's blood and the merits of his
innocent death (which now was plainly seen by all well-meaning
men, and acknowledged by many also of his
enemies, as before I have related), that whereas the
Catholics did already feel a sharp shower of persecution
in continual searchings and imprisonments and vexations
much more than in former years they had experienced;
and whereas they might easily discern a greater storm
coming towards them, seeing, as it were, a thick and dark
cloud coming on apace, carried furiously with the wind in
such sort that it was likely to spread itself over all their
hemisphere, intending to make a destroying deluge, no less
universal than violent: though they might plainly see
and hear daily thundered in their ears what cutting and
cruel laws were intended and prepared against the Parliament
which then was at hand: though they were assured
beforehand that the penal statutes which then were to be
enacted were so many and so merciless that their life would
be more tedious (and terrible to many minds) than death
itself: though they could find no friends that could or
would now oppose themselves <q>murum pro domo Dei;</q><note place='foot'><q>A wall for the house of Israel</q> (Ezech. xiii. 5).</note>
the noblemen that were Catholics or esteemed friends to
Catholics, together with all principal recusants, being
clapt in prison; and all others that before did seem to
favour the cause now being blown away with this storm
of persecution, and carried with the current of the present
stream rather to oppose themselves against Catholics, both
in word and action, than any ways to seek the release or
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
relaxation of their present afflictions or prepared penalties:
though all this, and more than I can in this place commodiously
set down, were felt and feared by the Catholics
at this time, yet such was the goodness of God towards us,
such the force of His grace obtained by the merits of these
holy martyrs, that presently, upon the death of blessed
Father Garnett, you might see his innocent blood had
warmed all their hearts; you might see in them a new
fervour, expecting persecution with a peaceable and
cheerful mind; you might see them everywhere begin
to prepare themselves neither to resist nor run away,
but how to bear the blows of persecution with Christian
patience.
</p>

<p>
And although there were some few examples of human
frailty, making choice rather to do against their conscience
in going to heretical service than to adventure the loss
of their earthly commodities, yet these were so few in
number, and so followed afterwards with the remorse of
conscience and the justice of God, that their example
did rather confirm than weaken the constancy of other
Catholics. I could hear but of three men of any note
then fallen in that sort, whereof one was a knight, of a
worthy family, and himself ever a devout Catholic; his
lady also, ever forward but much affected to those<note place='foot'>Party. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> men
that would not at the first submit themselves to [the]
Archpriest, whom His Holiness had appointed to be
their Superior in England. This good gentleman, as I
heard, having long paid the statute for his recusancy,
which is 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month, now upon this increase of
persecution, and the commodity of his recusancy which
should accrue unto the King being given unto a Scottish
man, the Catholic gentleman offered him 2,000<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> for a fine,
and to pay the rent of 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month, as he was wont to do
beside; but the Scottish man refusing to take his offer
upon hope to make a greater gain of him, the knight would
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
not endure to be made a prey to a man of so insatiable a
mind, and therefore resolved for the time to forfeit rather
the greater goods, the goods of grace, and said he would
conform himself to the law. He went, therefore, to their
heretical service, and saved the forfeiture of his worldly
estate, but with so great a torment of conscience that,
poor gentleman, he fell into such fits of melancholy and
distemper therewith, that it was generally given out that
he was distract of his wits.
</p>

<p>
There was another knight also, more rich in worldly
substance than furnished with spiritual money to maintain
the war against his spiritual enemies. This man,
seeing persecution to come against him with double
forces to the strength of grace which he had provided
to resist, <q>rogavit ea quæ pacis erant,</q><note place='foot'>He desired <q>conditions of peace</q> (St. Luke xiv. 32).</note> and did it in
such manner as that <q>omnes qui viderunt, inceperunt
illudere ei.</q><note place='foot'><q>All that</q> saw it began <q>to mock him</q> (St. Luke xiv. 29).</note> For, thinking to give double satisfaction if
he could bring his wife to church with him, he laboured
to overthrow her constancy in that kind, and when he
found she would not yield unto his desires therein, the
poor gentleman, out of his too much desire to seem conformable,
went unto the Commissioners and complains of
his wife's obstinacy in that point, desiring them to help
him to reform his wife, or rather, indeed, to deform her
according to his ill example. But she remained constant,
and he, poor knight, was laughed at for his labour, even
by his very enemies, with whom he sought to gain much
credit with that double diligence.
</p>

<p>
A third example I heard, of a gentleman of good
estate, who, preferring darkness before light, and seeking
to make a convention or union between God and Belial
in his soul, offered himself to go to their heretical conventicles
for the saving of his worldly substance; and so
he did, and escaped the punishment of the law: <q>sed
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
nunquid Deum fallere aut fugere potuit?</q><note place='foot'>But could he deceive or escape God?</note> No. <q>Qui
voluit animam suam salvam facere, perdidit eam.</q><note place='foot'>He who would save his life, lost it (Cf. St. Luke ix. 24).</note> He
went to church: he thought to preserve his goods for
the provision of many years, <q>et stultus non prævidit
quod illâ nocte repeterent animam suam;</q><note place='foot'>And in his folly did not foresee that that night they would require his
soul of him (Cf. St. Luke xii. 20).</note> he was
stricken with sudden death, leaving his goods to the
fruition<note place='foot'>Enjoying. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> of others, and this dreadful example to the
admonition of all.
</p>

<p>
So merciful hath God been unto us in these times of
our greatest needs and trial, as to encourage us by the
worthy example of many that stand, and to terrify by the
example of these few that have fallen; for I have not
heard of any other examples of any men<note place='foot'>Worthy. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> of note; which,
if we compare with that which St. Cyprian recordeth of
his times, when great numbers did run to offer themselves
before they felt the force of persecution, upon the only
fame and fear that an edict was to be published against
the Christians, this may give us great hope that God
neither is nor will be wanting with His graces, if we be
not wanting to ourselves, but will give us abundance of
spiritual forces answerable to the measure of that trial He
will put us unto, <q>nec patietur nos tentari ultra<note place='foot'>Supra. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> id quod
possumus, sed faciet cum tentatione proventum ut possimus
sustinere.</q><note place='foot'>He <q>will not suffer</q> us <q>to be tempted above that which</q> we <q>are
able; but will make also with temptation issue, that</q> we <q>may be able to
bear it</q> (1 Cor. x. 13).</note>
</p>

<p>
The Parliament presently ensued, against which time
the Puritans had provided two pestilent books, as hath
been touched before: the one to prove all recusants to
be traitors, the other that the rules and precepts of the
Catholic doctrine, yea, the very fruit of the whole tree
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
of the Catholic Roman faith, was to teach men disobedience
to Princes, yea, to deprive Kings of their
temporal estates, and, finally, to kill, murder, and destroy
their persons. And all this to the end that both the
King himself and all the Peers of the realm might be
so incensed against Catholics and their religion, as to
proceed by laws against the one, as against traitors proved
and convinced so to be, and to seek by all means possible,
not only to cut down the other as a tree bearing in their
opinion such poisoned fruit, but rather wholly to root it
out of their earth of England, that there might be no
memory left of the name of a Catholic in the land. And
they prevailed so far with the false reasons set down in
these malicious books, and with their most<note place='foot'>Secret and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> subtle and
manifold subornations exhibited unto His Majesty and
the Peers in the Parliament House, taking occasion
to blow the coals that already were kindled in dislike
taken against Catholics for the late attempt, that they
easily prevailed to get those laws passed which before
they were resolved of, and which in particular were known
to be a breeding when those gentlemen ran so heady a
course to prevent so great a deluge of persecution, which
they feared, and we have felt to light upon us.
</p>

<p>
For although they now intitle this new increase of persecution
to be occasioned by that temerarious conspiracy,
which is disliked by us as much as by themselves, yet
certain it is (as I have showed before) that these laws
were intended and prepared before either they or we knew
anything of this intention of conspiracy. And many of
the Puritans themselves, <q>ex abundantiâ cordis,</q><note place='foot'><q>Out of the abundance of the heart</q> (St. Matt. xii. 34).</note> could
not choose but utter how fully they were resolved in
that Parliament to seek the utter extirpation of the
Catholics, and what things in particular they would
procure and were prepared to be enacted against them.
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
And truly the laws which they then intended, and which
they afterwards in the Parliament procured to pass against
us, were very sufficient in the likelihood of human reason
to work the effect which they most wished, and to root
out Catholic religion and all that professed the same
out of the land, if God did not stand in defence of His
servants,<note place='foot'>Beholding St. Stephen's conflict.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> against Whom neither wit nor force of man,
<q>imo nec portæ inferi prævalebunt.</q><note place='foot'>Nor even the gates of hell shall prevail (Cf. St. Matt. xvi. 18).</note> How cruel and
afflictive the laws are in themselves, and how grievous
and intolerable it is for Catholics to live where they are
put in execution, I will leave to the judgment of the
prudent reader, meaning in the next chapter to set down
a catalogue of them, that he may see in one place collected
together a sum of those afflictions unto which we are
continually subject, that he may not hereafter permit
himself to be deceived with such false reports, as are
of purpose given out by the politics of England, that
forsooth the persecution is not great and that none are
there punished, especially not with death, but for matter
of State and treason against the Prince; which to be most
untrue his own eyes shall be judge, when he reads the
very words of the statutes enacted, which I will truly but
briefly set down as they lie in the statute-book, which
is printed and in every man's hands through England, so
well known that it cannot be contradicted.
</p>

<p>
And now, after the Parliament in which all these
laws were passed against us, to add unto the weight of
our heavy burthen, two other new afflictions were devised,
not specified in the laws: the one to punish the bodies
of Priests, the other to afflict and wound the minds of
all sorts of Catholics.
</p>

<p>
The first was a proclamation of banishment to all
Priests, that by such a day, which was there limited
within a short compass in the edict, all should depart
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
the realm; if not, to expect no mercy but present death
upon their taking. By which banishment, as they pretended,
on the one side, to do it in show of favour (as
though they sought not their deaths, but rather wished
they would draw themselves out of danger by their
voluntary departure). And, indeed, it is true they do
not so much seek their deaths as their departure, knowing
on the one side, by experience, what force the blood
of martyrs is of, both for the confirmation of Catholics
and conversion of heretics; and withal that there is
no means so effectual to scatter St. Peter's sheep, and
to make them a prey unto the wolf, as to take their
Pastors from them: for, as St. Bernard wisely saith,
<q>Væ illis qui assumuntur ad opera fortium, et non aluntur
cibo fortium.</q><note place='foot'>Woe unto those who are chosen for the works of the strong, and are not
fed with the food of the strong.</note> So that with this counsel, this seeming
favour, but indeed a slow consuming fire of persecution
was put in practice, and many Priests that were in prison
in several places of England were, according to the same
edict, put into ships and banished the realm by the day
prefixed. Knowing withal what misery and want they
were like to suffer in foreign countries, where they were
not capable of benefices or cure of souls for want of
language, and where their wants must needs be exceeding
great, having no friends nor acquaintance nor means to
furnish themselves even with necessaries, unless it please
Almighty God to move the hearts of Princes to impart
some temporal relief unto them, that they may be
partakers of their spiritual riches and the merits of their
sufferings. And this was hoped by the heretics would
not be very plentiful, in respect of the seminaries and
the wants of other afflicted Catholics in those parts, who
have also continual need of their charitable helps. And
hitherto, as I understand, their wants are very great and
the provision very small which is made for them, and the
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
hopes and desires of the heretics too much followed. But
God will raise them friends, I trust, and send them
provision in due season, <q>qui recordatus est Danielis in
lacu leonum et pascit etiam pullos corvorum invocantes
eum;</q><note place='foot'>Who remembered Daniel in the lions' den, and feeds even <q>the young
ravens that call upon Him</q> (Ps. cxlvi. 9).</note> and though sometimes He will try His servants
far, yet doth never forget the least of them, <q>quorum etiam
capilli numerati sunt.</q><note place='foot'>Whose very hairs are numbered (Cf. St. Matt. x. 30).</note>
</p>

<p>
The other more universal affliction, and the same so
much more grievous as it was more internal and piercing
even to the very souls of those that did accept it, was
a new oath devised for the distinction, as was pretended,
between faithful and faithless subjects to their Prince,
but indeed to distinguish the true subjects of the See
Apostolic from those that would renounce the power
thereof for the pleasing of their Prince.<note place='foot'>Here must be added the oath, and some few words after, to bring in the
other chapter. <hi rend='italic'>In marg.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII.
A Catalogue Of The Laws Against Catholics Made
By Queen Elizabeth And Confirmed By This
King, And Of Others Added By Himself.</head>

<p>
It hath ever been one point of policy in the Government
of England, since the beginning of persecution there, to
hide the same from the knowledge of the world, and from
being judged to be such by other kingdoms round about
them, as much as could be possible. To this end they
have ever sent and maintained their instruments in other
countries to<note place='foot'>Establish and. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> maintain that opinion in men's minds. To
this effect often advices have been<note place='foot'>Usually. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> sent into all Princes'
Courts by letters, which their friends and favourers there
should publish and procure to be believed. For this cause,
when any Catholic Princes' Ambassadors have come into
England, there hath been cunning wits ever employed to
resort unto them and possess them with a different
conceit from that which is and hath been the true state
of Catholics in England. And if they were such as come
with intention to labour for the help or ease of Catholics
in any sort, then, perhaps, for a time there should be some
cessation, or else some hope or half promises given, of
toleration, or mitigation at least, in that matter. And
that which they could not hide from being seen, they
would at least cover, and keep from being known to be
persecution for cause of religion. And, therefore, both in
their laws at home, and letters of information sent abroad,
would invest the same with other names, as of treason, and
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
offences against the State; when nothing less than disobedience
to the civil government was found in Catholics,
nor any subjects in the realm more faithful, or loving, or
obedient to their Prince in all things which were not
against their faith or religion. Yet did the politics ever
with printed books endeavour to prove that all was but
the execution of justice against traitors and persons
disobedient to the State. But herein they follow the
platform of the first enemies and persecutors of Christ
and His Church; and we the example of our Master,
suffering as He did, for that which we neither preach nor
practise, nor can be proved against us. Although they cry
out never so loud, <q>Invenimus hos subvertentes gentem
nostram,</q><note place='foot'><q>We have found</q> these men <q>perverting our nation</q> (St. Luke xxiii. 2).</note> because we desire to draw them to their ancient
faith and profession of the same: <q>et prohibentes tributum
dari Cæsari,</q><note place='foot'><q>And forbidding to give tribute to Cæsar</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ibid</hi>).</note> because we will not grant the
supremacy in ecclesiastical matters which he affecteth,
(for as for other corporal tributes, none are so ready as
Catholics to pay all duties): <q>et dicentes se Christum
et regem habere<note place='foot'>In Roma. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> alium,</q><note place='foot'>And saying that they have another Christ and King.</note> because we say and profess that
the Pope is Christ His Vicegerent on earth and governeth
His spiritual Kingdom, and we His children and subjects
in this spiritual government.<note place='foot'>Which Himself denied not to Pilate to be in the world, though it were
not a kingdom of the world. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Therefore, although they cry out never so much that
this is <q>contradicere Cæsari,</q><note place='foot'>To speak <q>against Cæsar</q> (St. John xix. 12).</note> and that whosoever doth
favour this cause is not <q>amicus Cæsaris;</q><note place='foot'><q>Cæsar's friend</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ibid</hi>).</note> yea, though
they cry, <q>Crucifige, crucifige,</q><note place='foot'><q>Crucify, crucify</q> (St. Luke xxiii. 21).</note> against us, and lay the
heavy cross of persecution upon our shoulders for this
cause, we must and will have patience, because it is
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
Christ His cause and quarrel, and not as they affirm,
and would have the world believe, that we suffer for
matter of State, or for stubbornness and disobedience
to<note place='foot'>Our Prince. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> the King or civil government.
</p>

<p>
And that the truth may herein the better appear, I
will now, according to my former promise, set down a
Catalogue of the laws that are made and stand in force
against Catholics in England, which being carefully considered
by the discreet and pious reader, I will ask no
other judge than himself, either touching the greatness or
the cause of persecution in England, for I know he will
both see and say much contrary to that which the politic
heretics in our country and their favourers in other places
have given out, and would gladly have to be believed.
</p>

<p>
And albeit there be many severe and rigorous
laws and statutes in force against Catholics at this day
in England, that were made by King Henry the Eighth
after his revolt from the Church of Rome, as also in<note place='foot'>By. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> the
Governors of King Edward the Sixth, under whom
religion was first altered and the sects of Zuinglius and
Calvin were brought into our country: which laws and
statutes, being repealed by the Princes of pious memory,
King Philip and Queen Mary, were revived again and
established by the authority of other Parliaments under
Queen Elizabeth and the same confirmed, as hath been
said, by His Majesty that now is: yet do I not think it
necessary to set down<note place='foot'>Cite. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> in this place any other statutes
than such as were made and allowed by these two latter
Princes, which comprehend all the other, with many
additions and aggravations besides. And in citing them,
I will use as near as I can the very words themselves of
the statutes, as they are in print.
</p>

<p>
First, then, Queen Elizabeth, coming to the crown in
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
the year of Christ 1558, she called a Parliament soon after,
in the said first year of her reign, wherein she repealed all
the good statutes and laws which her sister, Queen Mary,
had made in favour of Catholic religion, conform to the
laws of all her ancestors, Kings of England, from the
first Christian King until that time, except the latter end
of her father's reign, King Henry the Eighth, and the
minority of her brother, King Edward the Sixth, whose
laws in favour of schism and sectaries<note place='foot'>Heresy. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> Queen Elizabeth
revived, adding many of her own, which after do ensue.
</p>

<p>
And first of all, she meaning to break principally with
the See of Rome, as well in regard of her nativity, which
the said See held not for legitimate, as of the favour borne
by the said See to Queen Mary of France and Scotland,
mother to our King that now is, then living and reigning
in prosperity, and much envied and suspected by the other;
it was enacted that every Englishman, of what state,
degree, or condition soever, whensoever he taketh any
office, dignity, ecclesiastical benefice, or holy orders, any
degree of school, university, profession, or other promotion
temporal or spiritual, shall take a corporal oath upon the
Evangelist protesting and swearing that he doth utterly
testify and declare in his conscience that the Queen is
Supreme Head of the Church of England and not the
Pope; and that neither he nor the See of Rome had any
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, power, superiority, or pre-eminence
over that Church, nor ought to have. So help
him God.<note place='foot'>As by the contents of that book, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi> Elizab. cap. 1°.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Stat. an° 1° Elizab. cap. 1°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And moreover, that whosoever shall refuse to take and
make this oath, being required thereunto, shall for the
first time of denial, not only be disabled of the foresaid
preferments, offices, degrees, and dignities whatsoever, but
also lose and forfeit all his goods and lands to the said
Queen, and suffer perpetual imprisonment as in case of
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
<hi rend='italic'>præmunire</hi>. And for the second time, if he persist three
months in the same after the first tender, and will not take
and pronounce the same oath in form aforesaid, then he
shall forfeit, lose, and suffer death, and other like pains,
forfeitures, judgments, and executions as is used in cases
of high treason. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid. et an° 5° cap. 1°.</hi> This treason
you may see was only against the state of heresy and
schism, not against the State of Queen or Commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
And then yet further. Whosoever shall by writing,
printing, preaching, or teaching, by express words, deed,
or act (for so are the words of the statute), advisedly and
directly affirm, hold, set forth, maintain or defend the
authority, power, or jurisdiction spiritual or ecclesiastical
of the Bishop of Rome, or his See, heretofore claimed
or used within the realm of England, or of any other
dominion or country thereunto belonging; for his first
offence he shall forfeit and lose all his goods and chattels,
as well real as personal: and for the second offence,
besides the loss of goods and lands, he shall be cast into
perpetual prison: and for the third time (if again he offend
in defending the said Pope's authority), he shall suffer the
pains of death, and other penalties, forfeitures, and losses
appointed in the cases of high treason. <hi rend='italic'>An° 1° Eliz. cap.
3° et an° 5° cit°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And then for conclusion. Whosoever shall be aiders
or abettors to any such offenders, assisting or comforting
them to set forth and extol the said power and ecclesiastical
authority of the Bishop of Rome, or to refuse
the foresaid oath in form before set down, and shall be
lawfully convicted thereof; they shall for the first time
lose all their goods and lands, and for the second be
condemned to perpetual prison as in the statute of provision
or <hi rend='italic'>præmunire. An° 5° Eliz. cap. 1°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And these punishments were afterwards more increased
by another Act of the same Queen, in the fifth year of her
reign, where it was ordained that all aiders, counsellers,
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
and comforters<note place='foot'>And abettors. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> in this case should for the second time
suffer the pains of death, and other forfeitures and losses
of their goods, lands, honours, and nobility, as in cases
of high treason. <hi rend='italic'>An° 5° cap. 1°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It was ordained in like manner, for preventing of
the Catholic education of all English youths, that no
person shall take upon him to be a schoolmaster or
teacher of children, either in public schools or private
houses, except he first take the said oath against the
Pope's spiritual authority, and that he believe the supreme
authority of the Queen in all causes ecclesiastical. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it is enacted by authority of the said Parliament
that all clergymen shall leave and abandon from
this time forward the old Roman use of Latin service,
Mass, and administration of other Sacraments, and shall
betake themselves to say or sing the same in English in
all churches and chapels, and to administer the Sacraments
after the manner, rites, and fashion which is set down and
prescribed in a new book of Common Prayer set forth for
the purpose, and he that shall refuse to do so, or shall use
any other rite or form of service or Sacraments than is
therein appointed, shall for his first default be committed
to prison for six months and lose the fruits of all his
ecclesiastical living for a whole year, and for the second
offence shall lose all his living for ever and lie in prison a
year, and for the third time shall be condemned to
perpetual prison all the time of his life. <hi rend='italic'>An° 1° Eliz.
cap. 2°.</hi> Here you may see what it is they intend when
they urge Catholics to come to their churches and service,
and that it is no act of temporal duty or obedience in
civil matters which they require (as they will sometimes
pretend, to make us thought disobedient and stubborn), but
a renunciation of our old and the only true religion and a
conformity to their new doctrine. This is the thing which
we refuse, and for which they call us recusants, and for
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
which they punish us by many and severe penalties, as
shall appear by those that follow.
</p>

<p>
And conform to this it was also decreed that if any
layman that hath no ecclesiastical livings shall be present
at any other sort of service than the aforesaid appointed in
the common book of prayer, as, for example, at Mass or
Roman service, or shall receive any other sacraments, or
after other manner, form, or ceremony than is there prescribed,
he shall, for the first time of his so offending,
forfeit an hundred marks of lawful English money unto
the Queen, for the second four hundred marks, and for the
third shall lie in prison all days of his life. And if he
refuse to come to the church he shall pay xiid. for every
Sunday and holiday wherein he faileth. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 1° et 5°
Eliz. cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
These laws made Queen Elizabeth in the first five years
of her reign. But afterwards, growing more angry with
Catholics and Catholic religion, but especially with the
See of Rome for the sentence of Pius V<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>tus</hi> against her, she
added many bloody laws more, in the thirteenth year of
her reign. As, for example, that if any man shall bring
into England or into any of the dominions thereunto
belonging, from the Pope of Rome or from any man that
hath authority from him, any Bull, writing, instrument, or
authority to absolve or reconcile any person, or to promise
any such absolution or reconciliation by speech, preaching,
teaching, writing, or any other open deed, that then all and
every such act or acts, offence or offences, shall be deemed
and adjudged by the authority of this Act to be high
treason. And as well the offenders as the procurers,
abettors, and counsellors, shall suffer death and other
losses as traitors. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 13° Eliz. cap. 1°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, that if any person within the realm of
England or dominions thereof, after the first day of
July, Anno Domini 1571, shall willingly receive or take
any such absolution or reconciliation from the said Bishop
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
of Rome or any of his successors, or by any that have
authority from him; yea, if he shall receive or admit any
manner of Bull, writing, or instrument from the said See
of Rome, written or printed, containing any such thing,
matter, or cause whatsoever, or if any offer thereof, motion,
or persuasion being made unto him, shall not disclose or
reveal the same to some of the Privy Council, all shall be
high treason in him, and he shall suffer death and other
losses for the same, as in cases of that crime is accustomed.
<hi rend='italic'>Ibidem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And yet further, that whosoever shall bring into any
dominions of England after the time before named any
token or tokens, thing or things, called by the name of
Agnus Dei, or any crosses, pictures, beads, or any such
like, from the Bishop or See of Rome, or from any person
or persons authorized from the said Bishop or See to
consecrate or hallow the same; or shall deliver or offer,
or cause to be delivered, any part thereof to any subject of
this realm, or of any the dominions thereof, to be worn
or used in any wise, that then, as well the same person or
persons that shall receive the same to the intent to use and
wear, being thereof lawfully convicted by the order of the
common laws of this realm, shall incur the penalties,
pains, and forfeitures provided by the statute of <hi rend='italic'>præmunire</hi>,
which are the loss of all his lands and goods and
perpetual imprisonment. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 13º Eliz. cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Now when, by the acerbity and peril of so many cruel
laws and statutes, divers Catholics, being terrified, desired
and sought means to go into voluntary banishment beyond
the seas, and to leave the realm either with or without
licence, the Queen, understanding thereof, prevented them
with another new law the very next year after, enacting
that all and every person and persons, of what state,
degree, or condition soever they be, under the obeisance
of the said Queen, who sithence the first day of her reign
have passed or hereafter shall pass into any dominions
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
of foreign Princes without her special licence by writing,
under the great seal of England, privy seal, or privy signet,
and shall not return within the space of six months next
after proclamation made for them to return and yield
their bodies to the custody and ward of the sheriff of the
county, &amp;c.; all such persons shall forfeit and lose to the
said Queen the whole profits of their manors, lands, tenements,
and hereditaments during their lives, and all their
goods and chattels for ever. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 14° cap. 6°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, that if any person, born under the obedience
of Her Majesty, have or shall pass into foreign countries
with leave and licence, as before is prescribed, and shall
not presently, within six months after the expiring of the
said licence, return home and yield their bodies in custody,
as is before prescribed, shall suffer the same loss of goods
and chattels and the rents of their lands as the other that
went forth without licence.
</p>

<p>
And whatsoever conveyances, estates, grants, leases,
gifts, or devises, they or any of them shall be found to
have made of their lands and goods for their own relief to
defraud the Queen, shall be utterly void, and of no
validity at all in law. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 14º Eliz. cap. 6°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
These laws passed in the first fourteen years of the
Queen's government. But afterwards, as she grew older,
she did in most Parliaments aggravate the same. As,
namely, in the twenty-third year of her reign, taking upon
her to expound and explicate the former statute of
bringing in Bulls, &amp;c., from Rome, she determineth that
by what means soever any man did pretend faculty or
power to absolve any person or persons from their sins, or
shall reconcile them to the Roman Church, or persuade to
the acknowledgment of the Pope's ecclesiastical authority
over England, it shall be high treason both to the
absolver and the absolved, to the reconciler and to the
reconciled, that shall willingly yield thereunto, yea, and to
all the procurers, aiders, and counsellors. All which, being
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
lawfully convicted thereof, shall suffer death, as in case of
high treason. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 23° Eliz. cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And if any person or persons shall come to know of
any man so absolved and reconciled, or of any such that
doth absolve or reconcile, and shall not, within twenty
days at the furthest, disclose the same to some justice of
peace, or to some higher officer of the Prince, he shall be
taken, tried, and judged, suffer and forfeit as offenders in
misprision of treason, <hi rend='italic'>vdlt.</hi>, he shall forfeit his lands and
livings, but not suffer death for the same. <hi rend='italic'>Ibidem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Month's Recusance.</note>
In this Parliament also it was decreed, that for so much
as many Catholics did upon conscience retire themselves
from going to the Protestants' church and service more
than before, that every such recusant,
being above the age of sixteen years, instead of paying
xii<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> for every Sunday, which was by former statute
appointed, should now forfeit and pay to the Queen 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
of lawful English money for every month, and, besides
this, should be bound to put in sufficient sureties in the
[sum] of 200<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> at the least for their good behaviour, and so
to continue bound until such time as the person so bound
do conform himself to come to church. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 29° Eliz.
cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And, moreover, because it was presumed that every
recusant would not be able to pay this 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month for
his recusancy, it was enacted that such as were not able to
pay the said statute should pay two parts of three of all
their lands and goods, so as he that should (for example)
have three hundred should pay two hundred yearly to
the Queen for his recusancy, and retain one hundred for
maintenance of himself, his wife, children, and family.
</p>

<p>
In the same Parliament it was also enacted that if any
person or persons, body politic or corporal, after the Feast
of Pentecost then next ensuing, should keep any schoolmaster
for their children which should not repair to the
church, or not be allowed by the Bishop or Ordinary of the
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
diocese (which allowance could not be had without abjuring
the Pope's authority and the Catholic religion, as before
hath been showed), then shall he or they forfeit and lose
for every month<note place='foot'>So keeping. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> 10<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>, and the schoolmaster or teacher
himself, besides his lying in prison for one whole year,
shall be disabled for ever to be a teacher of youth or to
exercise that office in any place afterwards.
</p>

<p>
And to the end that Catholic recusants might be able
to pay these payments and pecuniary forfeitures to the
Queen, and not be able to make away any part of their
livings for their better relief, it was also enacted and
declared in this Parliament that every grant or conveyance
of goods or lands, every bond, judgment, or
execution had or made from that time forward which
should be judged to be done of purpose to defraud the
Queen, or to save their lands or goods from being forfeited
by virtue of<note place='foot'>According to. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> this statute, that all such conveyance made
by any Catholic recusant since the beginning of the said
Queen's reign, or after to be made for the use and relief
of the said recusant, or any of his, should not be available
in law, but all void, as if they had not been made. <hi rend='italic'>Anno
28° Eliz. cap. 6°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
But a little before this, to wit, in the precedent year,
the said Queen, understanding that Priests and ecclesiastical
men were multiplied in England by reason of
the English Seminaries in Catholic Princes' dominions,<note place='foot'>Foreign countries. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note>
caused terrible thundering statutes to be made against
them. And first, that all and every Jesuit, Seminary
Priests, and other Priests whatsoever, made and ordained
out of the realm of England by any authority, power, or
jurisdiction derived, challenged, or pretended, from the
See of Rome, since the Feast of the Nativity of St. John
Baptist in the first year of the said Queen's reign, 1559,
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
shall within forty days depart out of the realm, and shall
not return again without peculiar licence of Her Majesty,
under pain of death and other losses and forfeitures
accustomed in cases of high treason. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 27° Eliz.
cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And then, secondly, if any subject of the realm
whatsoever, after the said time of forty days expired,
shall wittingly and willingly receive, relieve, comfort, or
maintain any such Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Priest,
Deacon, Religious, or ecclesiastical person as is aforesaid,
knowing him to be such an one, such suffer the pain of
death, and other losses, as in case of felony. <hi rend='italic'>Ibidem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it was enacted by authority aforesaid, that if
any of Her Majesty's subjects or their children, now being
or hereafter shall be brought up in any College of Jesuits
or Seminary already erected or hereafter to be erected in
the parts beyond the seas, shall not within six months
next after proclamation in that behalf, to be made in the
City of London under the great seal of England, return
into this realm, and thereupon, within two days next after
his return, before the Bishop of the diocese, or two justices
of peace of the county where he shall arrive, submit
himself to Her Majesty and the laws, and take the oath
of supremacy against the Bishop of Rome his ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, set forth in the first year of the Queen's reign;
that then every such person otherwise returning or abiding
without such submission and forswearing his religion, as is
aforesaid, shall be adjudged a traitor, and suffer, lose, and
forfeit, as in cases of high treason. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 21° Eliz. cap. 6°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And it was further enacted in the same Parliament
that, if any subject of the Queen's, after the foresaid forty
days expired, shall either by way of exchange, bank,
merchandize, or any shift or means whatsoever, wittingly
and willingly, directly or indirectly, convey or send over
the seas or out of the Queen's dominions any money or
other relief to or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Deacon,
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
Religious, or ecclesiastical person, scholar, student, or the
like, or for the maintenance or relief of any College or
Seminary already erected or to be erected, that every such
person so offending shall lose all his goods and lands and
suffer perpetual imprisonment, as in case of <hi rend='italic'>præmunire</hi>.
Also it was enacted that whosoever should send over any
such students as aforesaid to the Seminaries shall for every
time forfeit 100<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Statute of confinement.</note>
And yet further, in the year 35
of the Queen's reign it was enacted that every
recusant persevering in denial to go to the Protestants'
churches should be bound to go to their ordinary places of
dwelling, and not to depart from thence above five miles,
under pain of losing all their goods and chattels. And
they which should have no certain dwelling-place should
repair to the place where their father and mother dwelt,
under the same pains and forfeiture. And he that should
fail in this either is condemned to live in perpetual prison
or to abjure the land. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 35° Eliz. cap. 2°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
And yet this being not thought sufficient severity in this
kind, another statute was made, ordaining that whosoever,
by printing, writing, or express words, deeds, or speeches,
should practise or go about to move or persuade any of the
Queen's subjects to deny her power in ecclesiastical causes,
or to abstain from going to the Protestants' church, or to
be present at any unlawful assemblies under colour or
pretence of any exercise of religion contrary to Her
Majesty's laws, or shall themselves refuse for three
months' space to go to the said churches and hear divine
service, that then they shall be forced to abjure the realm
and go into perpetual banishment, or if they refuse the
same, they shall suffer death and other losses for it, as in
cases of felony. <hi rend='italic'>Anno 35° Eliz. cap. 1°.</hi>
</p>

<p>
These are the chief statutes made against Catholic
religion in general by the late Queen Elizabeth. For we
do pretermit divers others more particular, and concerning
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
particular persons. As, for example, that of the 28th of
her reign (cap. 1°), wherein the Lord Thomas Paget, Baron,
Sir Francis Inglefield, Knight (one of the Privy Council
to Queen Mary, of worthy memory), and other Catholic
gentlemen, were attainted of treason, their goods and lands
confiscate, upon the former statute of fugitives, for that
they either went forth of England without licence, for
preservation of their consciences, or returned not when
their licence was ended.
</p>

<p>
Another statute was also made in the 39th year of
Queen Elizabeth's reign (cap. 8°), wherein it was decreed
that all such Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and other
spiritual Prelates of Queen Mary's time, as were deprived
by this Queen's ecclesiastical authority, for that they
would not accommodate themselves unto the form of
religion by her set forth, were well and lawfully deprived,
and by their deprivation the said bishoprics were made
merely void, and the others invested in their places by the
Queen's authority were only the true Bishops and had
lawful episcopal jurisdiction.<note place='foot'>Authority. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> And divers other such
particular things, which in this place we think good to
pass over.
</p>

<p>
All these statutes, then, of Queen Elizabeth against
Catholic people and their religion, being so grievous and
rigorous, as you see, were confirmed by His Majesty that
now is, without any restraint or mitigation, in the first
Parliament, as before hath been said, with divers other
aggrievances thereunto added of new; as that Catholic
recusants should not only pay the 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month ordained
by the former statute for such as refused to go to the
Protestants' church and service for conscience sake, but,
besides this 20<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month to be paid for himself, he should
also pay 10<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> a month for his wife or children that shall
refuse to go to the said churches, yea, and another also for
his servants.
</p>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<p>
Moreover, that all such young men or children that
shall study on that<note place='foot'>This. <hi rend='italic'>Erased in Orig.</hi></note> side the seas (being Catholics) or
frequent the schools or Colleges of any of the Jesuits, or
shall not return home within a certain time limited to
give account of themselves and their religion, shall forfeit
their inheritances in England and other dominions of His
Majesty, and the next of his kindred shall enjoy the
forfeiture that will conform himself, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
And furthermore, whereas, in the beginning of his said
reign, certain new canons, constitutions, and ordinances
were agreed upon by those of the Protestant clergy to
molest and afflict Catholics withal, by pretended censures
of excommunications, as, namely, that four times at least
every year all preachers, readers of divinity, and all other
ecclesiastical persons, in sermons, collations, and lectures,
shall teach open and declare to the people that all authority
and jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome (as a thing not
having any ground by the law of God) is, for most just
causes, taken away and abolished, and that therefore no
manner of obedience or subjection is due thereunto, but
only that the King's power, which in his dominions and
countries is the highest power under God, above all other
powers and potentates upon earth; and that whosoever
denieth this, let him be excommunicated <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi>, and
not restored but only by the Archbishop after his
repentance and public revocation of those his wicked
errors. These are the words of his first two canons.
</p>

<p>
And the same punishment is laid upon whomsoever
shall hold or affirm that the Church of England now
established by law under His Majesty, is not a true and
Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine
of the Apostles.
</p>

<p>
And many other things like unto this, passing from one
article to another of their sect, and binding Catholics,
under pain of excommunication, to believe and hold
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
all that they hold, or else to be vexed with citations,
condemnations, excommunications, and other vexations,
together with the writs and processes <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de excommunicato</foreign>
capiendo, as before you have heard suggested by the
Chancellor. Unto all which His Majesty gave consent
and authority by his letters patent, under the great seal
of England, upon the year 1603, and first of his reign, in
these words:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>We have, for us and our heirs and lawful successors,
of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion
given, and by these presents do give our royal assent to
all and every of the said canons, orders and ordinances
and constitutions, and to all and everything in them
contained. And we do, by our said prerogative royal
and supreme authority in causes ecclesiastical, notify,
confirm, and establish, by these our letters patent, the
said canons, orders, &amp;c., and all and everything in them
contained. And, moreover, do straitly enjoin and
command by our said authority, and by these our letters
patent, that the same be diligently observed and executed,</q>
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
So His Majesty, in the first year of his reign, after he
had confirmed and revived all the laws of Queen Elizabeth
made and executed against Catholics; by all which he
made it evident unto his Catholic subjects that he would
not only continue and go forward in the steps of Queen
Elizabeth touching the persecution of Catholics, but
increase and add unto the same. For this increase of
afflictions, which was laid upon Catholics the first year of
his reign, was little in respect of that which was intended
against them. Which divers of the forward Puritans did
not stick to affirm and to threaten in the King's
name, as Roboam did in the beginning of his reign, saying,
<q>Minimus digitus meus grossior est dorso patris mei. Et
nunc pater meus posuit super vos jugum grave, ego autem
addam super jugum vestrum; pater meus cecidit vos
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
flagellis, ego autem cædam vos scorpionibus.</q><note place='foot'><q>My little finger is thicker than the back of my father. And now my
father put a heavy yoke upon you, but I will add to your yoke: my father beat
you with whips, but I will beat you with scorpions</q> (3 Kings xii. 10, 11).</note> To the
like effect did many of his officers give out His Majesty's
intentions to be; which, though we may presume to have
been contrary to his royal disposition, yet they did so far
prevail with him, that he afterwards verified what they had
foretold, by confirming the former laws of Queen Elizabeth
and adding unto them as you have heard. But especially
when he called the second Parliament, and in that suffered
to be packed together all the principal Puritans of the
realm, whose insatiable hatred against Catholics we knew
very well would never take up until they had made laws
answerable to their mind and malice against us. Then
they all before the Parliament consulted, and concluded
of the bills and laws they would urge to be passed against
Catholics, as afterwards, indeed, it was performed. And
many of those intended laws were known to divers
Catholics long before the Parliament time, which, as it
is thought, was a great motive unto the gentlemen to
undertake their rash and dangerous conspiracy, as deeming
so desperate a course to be a needful remedy in so
desperate a case.<note place='foot'>Here must be added the chief laws made in the third year of the King's
reign. And after that some few lines to show how much Catholics must
needs suffer under so heavy a yoke, more than they do under the Turk or any
other Government, and how hard it is for Catholics to live in such trials, being
so barred the Sacraments and helps, according to that of St. Bernard, <q>Væ
illis qui assumuntur in fortium et non aluntur fortium.</q> <hi rend='italic'>In marg.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
End Of The Narrative.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Alphabetical Index.</head>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Abbot, George</hi>, Archbishop;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a visit from clvi, present at Fr. Garnett's death <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persecutes Fr. Cornforth and the Vauxes <ref target='Pgclxxxvi'>clxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Sir George Talbot <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abergavenny, Katherine Lady;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lord Vaux's sister <ref target='Pgclxxxvi'>clxxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abington, Dorothy;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her conversion by Fr. Ouldcorne <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abington, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Tower <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condemned to death for harbouring Priests <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>life spared at Lord Mounteagle's intercession <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>absent when Henlip is searched <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apprehended <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Worcester <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meets his wife <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reprieved <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foils various Bishops of Worcester <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adams, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr, in the Marshalsea <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert, Archduke, Governor of Flanders; <ref target='Pgcxcvii'>cxcvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>delays foundation of Watten <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aldobrandini, Hippolitus Cardinal;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Viceprotector of the English College, Rome <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aldridge;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a merchant, reaches Douay <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfani,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends a MS. to England from Rome <ref target='Pgccl'>ccl</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alford, Michael, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>author of <hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi> <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allen, Wm., Cardinal;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wishes Fr. Gerard to return to England <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>desired harmony between seculars and Society <ref target='Pgcciv'>cciv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obtains an indulgence for a prayer for the conversion of England <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquaviva, Claude, General S.J.; <ref target='Pgccxxviii'>ccxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admits Fr. Gerard and Fr. Ouldcorne into the Society <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arden, Edward;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>executed <ref target='Pgcxv'>cxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arden, Francis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escapes from the Tower with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcxv'>cxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arragon, D. Blasco de, <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arundel, Anne Countess of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Fr. Southwell and Fr. Gerard lvii, at Acton <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arundel, Philip Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Tower x, <ref target='Pglvii'>lvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arundell, Henry Lord; letter from Fr. Thorpe <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashby Church;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of <q>good Sir Wm. Catesby</q> painted in <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashley, Ralph, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken to Worcester <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyred <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atkinson, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Priest spy, informs of Fr. Gerard's letters <ref target='Pglxxxviii'>lxxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tries to have him rearrested <ref target='Pgcxxix'>cxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrays Thomas Tichburn, the martyr <ref target='Pgcxxx'>cxxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Babington's</hi> plot; <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxvii'>xvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babthorpe, Sir Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcvii'>cxcvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babthorpe, Thomas, S.J.; <ref target='Pgccxlii'>ccxlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Sir Francis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard xciii, and two servants of Mrs. Vaux <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin, William, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Fr. Persons cclviii, proposed for attainder <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bales, Christopher;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pgxviii'>xviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bancroft, Richard, Bishop of London;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sermon at Paul's Cross <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enquires respecting Father Garnett's straw <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banks, Richard, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succeeds Fr. Gerard at Braddocks <ref target='Pgcxxxi'>cxxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barker, Thomas.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>William Wiseman's servant <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxlix'>xlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barkley, Sir Richard, Governor of the Tower;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxciii'>xciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resigns his governorship <ref target='Pgciii'>ciii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>

<lg>
<l>Bates, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>servant of Catesby, enters conspiracy <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suspected <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter of regrets <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baynham, Sir Edmund;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaumont, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tesimond'>Tesimond</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beesley, George;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pgxviii'>xviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellamy, Anne;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrays Father Southwell <ref target='Pgccxiv'>ccxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxviii'>ccxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellarmine, Robert Cardinal;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcciii'>cciii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bergholt, East, St. Mary's Abbey; <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishop, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Marshalsea <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackburn, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Thomson'>Thomson</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackfan, John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed as nominal Rector of Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcvii'>cxcvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackwell, George, the Archpriest;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house near the Inns of Court <ref target='Pgcxxx'>cxxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>informed of Watson's plot by Fr. Gerard, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blase, James, O.S.F., Bishop of St. Omers;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transfers Watten to Society <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blount, Richard, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intending to leave England <ref target='Pgclxxxvii'>clxxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Fr. Aquaviva <ref target='Pgccxlvii'>ccxlvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blunt, Sir Christopher;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Earl of Essex's rising <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Booth, Charles, S.J.; <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brabant, florin of; <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braddocks;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>William Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's residence <ref target='Pgxxxii'>xxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searched <ref target='Pglii'>lii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mass at <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brewster, a Priest at Northend <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briant or Brian, Alexander, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridewell;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Richard Fulwood in <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pgli'>li</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bromley, Sir Henry;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searches Henlip <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Fr. Garnett and Fr. Ouldcorne to London <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, Sir Basil; <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooksby, Eleanor; <ref target='Pgcxxxv'>cxxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browne, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Priest <ref target='Pgcxxxiv'>cxxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browne, William, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Lay-brother <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brussels, Benedictine Convent <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bryn;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seat of the Gerards <ref target='Pgix'>ix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brynhill, Sir Peter de; <ref target='Pgix'>ix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckley, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Jones'>Jones</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckland, Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's fellow-traveller <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchanan;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches regicide <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Campion</hi>, Edmund, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his praises by Fr. Henry Walpole <ref target='Pgxci'>xci</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of his coming to England <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caracena, Conde de; <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carvajal, Donna Luisa de;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her will <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds English Novitiate <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catesby, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entered the Plot in good faith <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposes it <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>descended from <q>good Sir William</q> <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his early life <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wounded in and fined for the Earl of Essex's rising <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consults Fr. Garnett in general terms <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conduct on discovery of the Plot <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scorched with powder <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shot <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manner of his death <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles, Duke of York; <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed as a recusant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clermont College, Paris;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard at <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clink, prison;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spiritual exercises in <ref target='Pglxxii'>lxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Good Friday in <ref target='Pglxxxvi'>lxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard in <ref target='Pglxix'>lxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Percy in <ref target='Pgcxxxiii'>cxxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Brother Emerson in <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>, <ref target='Pglxx'>lxx</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxviii'>lxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxix'>lxxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclix'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Brother Lilly in <ref target='Pglxxi'>lxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John Rigby, the martyr, converted by Fr. Gerard in <ref target='Pglxxii'>lxxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cokayne, Edward;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reports a search in Mrs. Jenison's house <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coke, Sir Edward;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines William Wiseman i,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard xciii, his book <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposes 8 Jesuits for attainder by Parliament <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his speech at Fr. Garnett's trial <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colendin, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gifford'>Gifford</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collyn, Patrick;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxv'>xcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<lg>
<l>Conference of Protestant Bishops and Puritans in 1605; <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contreras, Don Frances de; <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornelius John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manner of arrest <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornforth, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caught at Mass <ref target='Pgclxxxvi'>clxxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coughton;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bates saw Father Garnett and Father Tesimond at <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Counter, the prisons so called; <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pglxi'>lxi</ref>, <ref target='Pglxix'>lxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranedge, Henry and Elizabeth;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recusants <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranishe, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Robert, crosses to Middleborough <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cresswell, Joseph, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father Persons' <hi rend='italic'>Philopater</hi> attributed to him <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed for attainder <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superior in Spain <ref target='Pgccxxviii'>ccxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crooke, Sir John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opens prosecution of Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Dale</hi>, Mr.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Brother Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daniell;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mrs. Wiseman's servant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darbyshire, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes with Fr. Gerard to Rouen <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darcy, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Garnett'>Garnett</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Digby, Sir Everard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his and his wife's conversion <ref target='Pgcl'>cl</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his illness <ref target='Pgcliii'>cliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his affection for Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcliv'>cliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps to convert a friend <ref target='Pgclxvi'>clxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entered into the Plot <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in good faith <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his family <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his manliness <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Catholic life <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his office in the Plot <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Dunchurch <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his page William Ellis <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pgccii'>ccii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposes match between Lord Vaux and Earl of Suffolk's daughter <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house in Rutlandshire, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exculpates Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pgclxxix'>clxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>clears the Society <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allied to Earl of Salisbury <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asks to be beheaded <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's letter to <ref target='Pgccxxxiv'>ccxxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolman, the priest;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Mrs. Wiseman <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dormer, Dorothy;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Sir Henry Huddleston <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dormer, Jane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Duke of Feria <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drury, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pglxxvi'>lxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>living in Fr. Gerard's house <ref target='Pgcxxvii'>cxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunkellin, Richard Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wishes to go to confession <ref target='Pgclix'>clix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fights a duel <ref target='Pgclxi'>clxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries and converts Walsyngham's daughter <ref target='Pgclix'>clix</ref>, <ref target='Pgclxi'>clxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunsmore Heath; <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Egerton, Sir Thomas</hi>, Lord Chancellor;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>once a Catholic <ref target='Pglix'>lix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth, Princess; <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ellis'/>
<l>Ellis, William <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> John Williams;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>page to Sir Everard Digby <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>novice S.J. <ref target='Pgccii'>ccii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elmer, John, Bishop of London;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard in his custody, <ref target='Pgxiii'>xiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emerson;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Felsted <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Emerson'/>
<l>Emerson, Ralph, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Homulus <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>, <ref target='Pglxx'>lxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Clink <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>, <ref target='Pglxx'>lxx</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxviii'>lxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxix'>lxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his examination <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moved to Newgate <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Wisbech, into banishment, dies at St. Omers <ref target='Pglxxi'>lxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essex, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his rising <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eu, College at;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pgxvii'>xvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Everett, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hiding <ref target='Pgclxxx'>clxxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surprised at Mass <ref target='Pgclxxxi'>clxxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excommunications; <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Farmer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Garnett'>Garnett</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fawcet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a witness against Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fawkes or Faulks, Guido or Guy;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of the first conspirators <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a good soldier in Flanders <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>passes as Percy's man <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his office in the Plot <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in the vault <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apprehended <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> John Johnson <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Tower <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his confession <ref target='Pgccxxiv'>ccxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured ccxxv, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for pleading <q>Not guilty</q> <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feller;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mention of Fr. Garnett's straw <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferdinand, Prince Bishop of Liége; <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>, <ref target='Pgcciv'>cciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feria, Duke of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife Jane Dormer <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Filcock, Roger, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pglxxvi'>lxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisher, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Percy'>Percy</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<lg>
<l>Fitzherbert, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Bishop of Chalcedon <ref target='Pgccxlii'>ccxlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleming, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxciii'>xciii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Floyd, Henry, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pgccxlii'>ccxlii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclx'>cclx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxe, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed as a recusant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frank, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrays his master and Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his deposition <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Froude;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from, on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuller, Mr.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Brother Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulwood, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in Mr. Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxlix'>xlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulwood, Richard, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father Gerard's man <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Lady Gerard <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pgxlvi'>xlvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned in Bridewell <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pgli'>li</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pgli'>li</ref>, <ref target='Pglxiv'>lxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escapes <ref target='Pglxvi'>lxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps Fr. Gerard to escape from the Tower <ref target='Pgcxviii'>cxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Belgium <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garnett <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Gilford;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Novice S.J. <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Garnett'/>
<l>Garnett, Henry, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Darcy <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Walley <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pgclxxxix'>clxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Farmer <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his parentage <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father Gerard finds him in London, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives in Warwickshire <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his instructions <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>renewal of vows <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his foresight <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxlvi'>xlvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard tortured to say where he is <ref target='Pgxcvi'>xcvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgc'>c</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Fr. Gerard on his escape from Tower <ref target='Pgcxxiv'>cxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house called Morecroftes at Uxbridge, <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house in Spital <ref target='Pgcxliii'>cxliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>informed of Watson's plot by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consulted by Catesby on death of innocents <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrote to Rome his fears <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to St. Winifred's Well <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persuades discontented Catholics to send Sir Edmund Baynham to the Pope <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wise direction <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bates' evidence against him <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused in Proclamation <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attainder proposed <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hides at Henlip <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrayed by Humphrey Littleton <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified by a Priest <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>silences Sir Henry Bromley's chaplain <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed to Gatehouse <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pgclxxxii'>clxxxii</ref>, examined by Privy Council <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transferred to Tower <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cozened by his keeper <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overheard in conference with Fr. Ouldcorne <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kept from sleep and drugged <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>may now tell what he heard in confession <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried at Guildhall <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his indictment <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his speech <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his martyrdom <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the miraculous straw <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other signs <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on equivocation <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxx'>ccxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxviii'>ccxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garnett, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gatehouse <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Tower <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyred <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Novice at St. John's, Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garney, James;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sir Everard Digby's servant, <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garswood;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seat of the Gerards <ref target='Pgix'>ix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gasca, Donna Maria; <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gatehouse; Fr. Garnett and Fr. Ouldcorne committed to <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thomas Garnett there <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>John Grissold there <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gerard'/>
<l>Gerard John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Starkie, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Standish <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxciii'>xciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Tanfield, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Staunton, <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Brooke <ref target='Pgclxxxvii'>clxxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Nelson, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Tomson <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Harrison <ref target='Pgcclix'>cclix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>parentage <ref target='Pgix'>ix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>childhood <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is sent to Derbyshire <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has property at Ashton <ref target='Pgxi'>xi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Exeter College, Oxford <ref target='Pgxi'>xi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Rhemes <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Paris and Rouen <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vocation <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>falls ill and returns to England <ref target='Pgxiii'>xiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in custody of Elmer, Bishop of London <ref target='Pgxiii'>xiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed to Marshalsea <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fined for recusancy <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Paris and Rome <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enters English College <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained Priest <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admitted into Society <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>starts for England <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lands <ref target='Pgxviii'>xviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrested <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>,</l>
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaches Norwich <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrives in London <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Norfolk <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes his residence <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to live at Braddocks <ref target='Pgxxxii'>xxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hires a house in Golding-lane <ref target='Pgxlvi'>xlvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hiding-places <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pglii'>lii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxxxix'>cxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>received by Countess of Arundel <ref target='Pglvii'>lvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken at Middleton's <ref target='Pglviii'>lviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examined <ref target='Pglix'>lix</ref>, <ref target='Pglxi'>lxi</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxx'>lxxx</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxciii'>xciii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxiv'>lxxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcx'>cx</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxiii'>cxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxiv'>ccxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to the Counter <ref target='Pglxi'>lxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put in irons <ref target='Pglix'>lix</ref>, <ref target='Pglxiv'>lxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pglxix'>lxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his servants <ref target='Pglxv'>lxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removed to the Clink <ref target='Pglxix'>lxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house in charge of Ann Line <ref target='Pglxxii'>lxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wears Jesuit's dress in prison <ref target='Pglxxxi'>lxxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cell in Clink searched <ref target='Pglxxxix'>lxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removed to Tower <ref target='Pgxc'>xc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured the first time <ref target='Pgxcvii'>xcvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the second time <ref target='Pgci'>ci</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the third time <ref target='Pgciii'>ciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>says Mass <ref target='Pgcxv'>cxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escapes from Tower <ref target='Pgcxvii'>cxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves the Wisemans <ref target='Pgcxxxi'>cxxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fears to have to leave England <ref target='Pgcxxxi'>cxxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removes to Harrowden <ref target='Pgcxxxiii'>cxxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes half of a house in London <ref target='Pgcxxxix'>cxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>which is searched <ref target='Pgcxxxvi'>cxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>moves to a house near the Strand <ref target='Pgclxii'>clxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>where without his knowledge the conspirators receive Communion, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxiii'>ccxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his innocence of Powder Plot <ref target='Pgclxxiii'>clxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgclxxviii'>clxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hiding <ref target='Pgclxxxii'>clxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves England <ref target='Pgclxxxiv'>clxxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at St. Omers and Brussels <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Rome <ref target='Pgcclxi'>cclxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Louvain <ref target='Pgclxxxiii'>clxxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character <ref target='Pgccli'>ccli</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Profession <ref target='Pgclxxxiv'>clxxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bates' evidence against him <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters to the Council <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused in Proclamation <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed for attainder <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cleared by Sir Everard Digby <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters <ref target='Pgclxxxv'>clxxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxxi'>ccxxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxlvi'>ccxlvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclix'>cclix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his description <ref target='Pgclxxxvii'>clxxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disturbed in Belgium by English Government <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns through Spain to Rome <ref target='Pgccviii'>ccviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies there <ref target='Pgccix'>ccix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on equivocation <ref target='Pgccix'>ccix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his MS. on Powder Plot <ref target='Pgccxlviii'>ccxlviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his autobiography <ref target='Pgcclii'>cclii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerard Sir Gilbert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Master of the Rolls <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerard, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first Baronet <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knighted at James I.'s accession with fair words <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerard, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first Lord Gerard <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Knight Marshal <ref target='Pgcxxx'>cxxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerard, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Knight, of Bryn <ref target='Pgix'>ix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned twice in the Tower <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>released at great cost <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compounds for his recusancy <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dwelt at Etwall, within two miles of Tutbury Castle, <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghent;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tertianship founded by Anne Countess of Arundel <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gifford'/>
<l>Gifford, Gilbert, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Jacques Colendin;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Priest and spy <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilford, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Garnett'>Garnett</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golding-lane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's house there searched <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golthwaite;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sir John Yorke's house <ref target='Pgcclvii'>cclvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodman, Gabriel, Dean of Westminster;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Br. Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grafton, Novice, S.J.; <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grant, John; beats pursuivants <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joins the conspiracy <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>much scorched with powder <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>candidate for Society <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenway, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tesimond'>Tesimond</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grene, Christopher, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi> <ref target='Pgccxlvii'>ccxlvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grene, Martin, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter about Powder Plot <ref target='Pgccxlvii'>ccxlvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Griffin, Mrs.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Fr. Garnett's straw <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cured by it <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grissold, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guildhall;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard examined at <ref target='Pglxxxiv'>lxxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Garnett tried in <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Hall</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ouldcorne'>Ouldcorne</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrington, Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in charge of the Lady Elizabeth <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrowden, Great; <ref target='Pgcxxxv'>cxxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxlvii'>cxlvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>altar furniture at <ref target='Pgclxxv'>clxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searched for nine days <ref target='Pgclxxv'>clxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxc'>cxc</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bates saw the Fathers at <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored to Lord Vaux <ref target='Pgclxxxvii'>clxxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartley, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr, in the Marshalsea <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<lg>
<l>Hatton, Sir Christopher;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house <ref target='Pgcxxxv'>cxxxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heigham, William, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>maintains William Thomson the martyr <ref target='Pglxxiii'>lxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henlip;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thomas Abington's house, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Garnett hides there <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Ouldcorne lives there <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searched <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heywood, Mrs.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her presence of mind when her house is searched <ref target='Pgcxxxviii'>cxxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobadge House;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stephen Littleton's <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobocque, Baron de;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Flemish ambassador, testifies to Father Garnett's straw <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holt, William, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rector of English College at Rome <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Belgium <ref target='Pgcxxviii'>cxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unjustly accused <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homulus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Emerson'>Emerson</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hopton, Sir Owen;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Brother Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoskins, Anthony, S.J.; <ref target='Pgcxlix'>cxlix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgclxxx'>clxxx</ref>, with Fr. Gerard's friends <ref target='Pgcclx'>cclx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huddington;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Winters of <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huddleston, Sir Henry;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunston, Brian;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Fr. Gerard's service <ref target='Pgclxxxix'>clxxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huntingdon, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife Fr. Gerard's aunt <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurlston, Ha.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in prison <ref target='Pgclxxxix'>clxxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymn of All Saints; <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Inglefield, Sir Francis</hi>; attainted <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Jackson, Richard</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indicted for saying Mass at Braddocks <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James I.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his book for his son <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compares Papists and Puritans to two asses <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expectations on his accession <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disappointment <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deciphers the letter <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proclamation of Nov. 7, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his speech <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his book on the Powder Plot <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jenings, Alice, wife of Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a recusant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jenison, John and Michael;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's brothers-in-law <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeppes, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stayed at Frank's with the Wisemans <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesuits;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cleared <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Coke proposes eight for attainder by Parliament <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from, on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Jones'/>
<l>Jones, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Buckley, John, O.S.F.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pgxxxii'>xxxii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxvi'>lxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Kensington</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Laithwaite'>Laithwaite</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keyes, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his virtue and valour <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joins the conspiracy <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keynes, George, S.J.; <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knevet, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searches the vault <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches regicide <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Laithwaite'/>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Laithwaite, Thos.</hi>, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken, escapes, is retaken <ref target='Pgclxxvi'>clxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Scott <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Kensington <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>frequents Fr. Gerard's house <ref target='Pgclxxvi'>clxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxiv'>ccxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasnet, John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>serves Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxv'>lxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laud, William Archbishop;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Lord Mountjoy and Lady Rich <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee Priory;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lord Rich's house, <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee, Roger, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in retreat <ref target='Pgcxxxvi'>cxxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxlvi'>cxlvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps to convert his friends <ref target='Pgcxlviii'>cxlviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcl'>cl</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Baldwin would send him to England <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard opposed to this as premature <ref target='Pgcclx'>cclx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leeds, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcvii'>cxcvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leicester, Earl of; <ref target='Pglxii'>lxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threats against Catholics xvii, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>my Lord of Leicester's books</q> <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenox, Duke of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's letter to <ref target='Pgccxxxi'>ccxxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lerma, Duke of; <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leutner, or Lewckener, Edmund;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Exeter College, Oxford <ref target='Pgxi'>xi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewkner, Thomas, Novice S.J. <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liége, florin of <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liége, foundation at <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lilly, John S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Clink <ref target='Pglxxi'>lxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>liberty purchased <ref target='Pgcix'>cix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Fr. Gerard in the Tower <ref target='Pgcxi'>cxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>helps him to escape from the Tower <ref target='Pgcxviii'>cxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is taken in his stead <ref target='Pgcxxxix'>cxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>outwits Wade <ref target='Pgcxliii'>cxliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death <ref target='Pglxvi'>lxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxliv'>cxliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<lg>
<l>Line, Anne;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr, has charge of Father Gerard's house <ref target='Pglxxiii'>lxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>changes house <ref target='Pgcxxviii'>cxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her husband <ref target='Pglxxiv'>lxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Mrs. Heywood <ref target='Pgcxxxviii'>cxxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her arrest at Mass <ref target='Pglxxv'>lxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her conduct in Court <ref target='Pglxxv'>lxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her death <ref target='Pglxxvi'>lxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lingard, John, D.D.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Communion of the conspirators <ref target='Pgccxxiii'>ccxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of a letter quoted <ref target='Pgccxxvii'>ccxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotes affidavit of Anthony Smith <ref target='Pgccxlvii'>ccxlvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Little John and Little Michael, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Owen'>Owen</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Littleton, Humphrey;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shelters Robert Winter and Stephen Littleton <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrays Father Garnett and Fr. Ouldcorne <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried at Worcester <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repents of his treachery <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Littleton, Stephen;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives the conspirators <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escapes for a time <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hobadge House <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried and executed at Stafford <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lopez;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louvain, St. John's;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first English Novitiate S.J. <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louvain, St. Monica's; <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Maltravers, James Lord</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>erroneously said to have been converted by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manners, Sir Oliver;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion <ref target='Pgclxvi'>clxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Fr. Aquaviva <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his return to England <ref target='Pgcciii'>cciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pgcciii'>cciii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>praise perhaps of him as intending to be a Priest <ref target='Pgcclxi'>cclxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mansel'/>
<l>Mansel <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Griffin, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Novice S.J. <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Markham, Anne Lady;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>correspondence with Earl of Salisbury about betraying Father Gerard <ref target='Pgclxxxviii'>clxxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marshalsea Prison; <ref target='Pgcxxx'>cxxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard in <ref target='Pgxiv'>xiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Br. Nicholas Owen in <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, Queen of Scots; <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>died because she was a Catholic <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a martyr <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confined at Tutbury Castle <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Babington's plot for <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxvii'>xvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Thomas Gerard, and Mr. Roulston take her part <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends gifts to new House at Liége <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endows the College there <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his children <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayer, Father, S.J.; <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayor of London, the Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searches Fr. Gerard's house <ref target='Pgclxxxi'>clxxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Middleton's;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard and Nicholas Owen taken there <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>, <ref target='Pglviii'>lviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from, on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miranda, Conde de; <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condessa de <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molina, Melchior de; <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montacute Papers; <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montague, Anthony Viscount; <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>last English Provincial before the suppression <ref target='Pgccli'>ccli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Henry, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lived at St. John's, Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Socius to Fr. Gerard at Louvain <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his scholarship <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morecroftes at Uxbridge;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Garnett's house <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>perhaps</hi> <ref target='Pgxlvi'>xlvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxxiv'>cxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morton, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Talbot'>Talbot</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motte;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his bark <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mountague, Dean of Chapel Royal; <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mounteagle, the Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the letter to <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his supper <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mountjoy, Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seduces Lady Rich <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myller, Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tailor of Rhemes, his confession <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>cxxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Nelson</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nevill, the Lady;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>died of ill-treatment in a search <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newall, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a pursuivant <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, John Henry, D.D.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norffooke, Nicholas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mr. Wiseman's servant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northampton, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reads the letter <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speech at conspirators' trial <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intercedes for the Vauxes <ref target='Pgclxxxvi'>clxxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<lg>
<l>Northend, Great Waltham;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mrs. Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumberland, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his four daughters <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nottingham, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ormes</hi>; a tailor <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostend;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boys taken going to St. Omers by <ref target='Pglxxix'>lxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ouldcorne'/>
<l>Ouldcorne, Edward, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Hall <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Naples to beg for the English College, Rome, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admitted into the Society xvi, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to England xvi, ccliv, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Dorothy Abington <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cured of cancer in the mouth by St. Winifred <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>danger on occasion of renewal of vows <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrayed by Humphrey Littleton <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an escape by ready wit <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed to Gatehouse <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overheard in conference with Fr. Garnett in the Tower <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken to Worcester <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his indictment <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts a felon in prison <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyrdom <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two notable signs after his death <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dream <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Overal, John, Dean of St. Paul's;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>present at Fr. Garnett's death <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Owen'/>
<l>Owen, Nicholas, S.J., <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Little John and Little Michael;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>, <ref target='Pglviii'>lviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes hiding-places <ref target='Pglvii'>lvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxlv'>cxlv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured <ref target='Pglxiv'>lxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Father Garnett's letters <ref target='Pglxxxix'>lxxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken at Henlip <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed to the Marshalsea <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured to death in Tower <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his patience when his leg was broken <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owen, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Prefect of the English Mission <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Page, Francis</hi>, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pgcxi'>cxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surprised at Mass <ref target='Pglxxv'>lxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is taken when visiting Fr. Gerard in the Tower <ref target='Pgcx'>cx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>released for money, becomes a Priest, a Jesuit, and a martyr <ref target='Pgcxi'>cxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paget, Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attainted <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paley;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from, on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Christopher;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Father Gerard's service <ref target='Pgclxxxix'>clxxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal, Mr.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reaches Douay <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peckham, Edmund;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's brother-in-law <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penal laws; <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>James' statutes <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Percy'/>
<l>Percy, John, S.J., <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Fisher; <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings at Flushing <ref target='Pgcxxxii'>cxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned in and escape from Bridewell <ref target='Pgcxxxiii'>cxxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Yorkshire <ref target='Pgcxxxiii'>cxxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Fr. Gerard at Stoke Pogis <ref target='Pgcxlvi'>cxlvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Harrowden <ref target='Pgcxlvii'>cxlvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Sir Everard Digby <ref target='Pgclxxiv'>clxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Mrs. Vaux <ref target='Pgclxxxiii'>clxxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclx'>cclx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Belgium <ref target='Pgcxcvii'>cxcvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Percy, Lady Mary;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her life in England <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her vocation <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her sisters <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxviii'>lxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Percy, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of the first conspirators <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>connection of Earl of Northumberland <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married John Wright's sister <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his early life <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Gentleman Pensioner <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hires house by the river <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and cellar for fuel <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his office in the Plot <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shot <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perkises and his man executed at Worcester <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perne, Andrew;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his religion <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persons, Robert, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <hi rend='italic'>Christian Directory</hi> <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbids state affairs <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of his coming to England <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Prefect of the English Mission <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclix'>cclix</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>admits Fr. Gerard into the Novitiate <ref target='Pgxvi'>xvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>praises Father Gerard's behaviour after the Powder Plot <ref target='Pgcclxi'>cclxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phelips, Sir Edward;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opens Powder Plot indictment <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his papers <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philips the decipherer;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>committed to Tower for correspondence with Mr. Owen <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrims' Register at Rome;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entry of Fr. Gerard's name <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polewhele;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pgxcv'>xcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollen, Joseph, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in hiding <ref target='Pgcxl'>cxl</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popham, Sir John, Chief Justice;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>execution of penal laws intrusted to <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>,</l>
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of his judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pronounces sentence <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port, Sir John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his three daughters <ref target='Pgcliii'>cliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cleared by the Conspirators <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Queen Mary's <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puckering, Lord Keeper;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>report made to <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puente, Luis de la, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his two letters to Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgccv'>ccv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puritans in Parliament <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and in authority <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Queenhithe</hi>, Conspiracy laid in, in Fr. Garnett's indictment <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Recusants</hi> given over to enrich courtiers <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>three degrees of, according to King James, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richard, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mansel'>Mansel</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richardson, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gatehouse <ref target='Pgcxc'>cxc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his examination <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rich, Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rich, Penelope Lady;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her story <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rigby, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr, converted in the Clink by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxxii'>lxxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rookwood, Ambrose;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his family <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joins the conspiracy <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scorched with powder <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wounded and taken <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>farewell to his wife <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roulston;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>took part with Mary Queen of Scots, betrayed by his son <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rouse;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Mechlin <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rydgeley, Mary;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries John Wiseman <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sacchini, Francis</hi>, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had the original of Fr. Gerard's Autobiography <ref target='Pgcclii'>cclii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salesberie, Mr.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Babington's plot, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salisbury, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discloses the Plot <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his book <hi rend='italic'>An Answer to certain Scandalous Papers</hi> <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speech in answer to Sir Everard Digby <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's letter to <ref target='Pgccxxxiii'>ccxxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>correspondence with Lady Markham <ref target='Pgclxxxix'>clxxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, Samuel;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mrs. Wiseman's servant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tailor, crosses to Middleborough <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schondonch, Giles, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rector of St. Omers cclviii, extract of letter <ref target='Pgccxlv'>ccxlv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Laithwaite'>Laithwaite</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Sir Walter;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>equivocation <ref target='Pgccxvii'>ccxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scudamore <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> John Wiseman;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Northend <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crosses to Middleborough <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Searches;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Fr. Garnett's <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Golding-lane <ref target='Pgxlv'>xlv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Northend <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Braddocks <ref target='Pglii'>lii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>house in London <ref target='Pgcxxxvi'>cxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Harrowden for nine days <ref target='Pgclxxv'>clxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Henlip <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Mrs. Jenison's <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manner of in general <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lady Nevill's death caused by <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seymour, Lady Jane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daughter of Thomas, Earl of Northumberland <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Protestant <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxviii'>lxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shefford, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Stratford'>Stratford</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheldon, Hugh, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes hiding-places <ref target='Pgcxlv'>cxlv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caught, sent to Wisbech and banished <ref target='Pgcxlvi'>cxlvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Shelley'/>
<l>Shelley, Owen <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Titchborn;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Novice S.J. <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rector of Liége <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherwin, Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherwood, Father; <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>none such in the Society <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherwood, John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>died before he came to be a Priest <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrewsbury, the Lady;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her zeal praised <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shurley;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mistress of Novices at St. Monica's, Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcvi'>cxcvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silisdon, Henry, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rector at Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Master of Novices at Liége <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>, <ref target='Pgccv'>ccv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his opinion of Fr. Gerard's talent for government <ref target='Pgccii'>ccii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvester, Novice S.J.; <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singleton, Dr.; <ref target='Pgcciv'>cciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sion House; Nuns of <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Anthony;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>affidavit respecting Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgccxlvii'>ccxlvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, William, Bishop of Chalcedon;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Fitzherbert's letter to
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
<ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's letter to <ref target='Pgccxxxviii'>ccxxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxlvi'>ccxlvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southwell, Robert, S.J.; <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his journeys with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his instructions <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surprised at Mass <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lived with Countess of Arundel <ref target='Pglvii'>lvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>maligned by Young <ref target='Pglxvii'>lxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured by Topcliffe <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invoked by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcxxiii'>cxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spiritual books <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of his martyrdom <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pgccli'>ccli</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>betrayed by Anne Bellamy <ref target='Pgccxiv'>ccxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxvii'>ccxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxiv'>ccxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxviii'>ccxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southworth, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's bailiff, <ref target='Pgxi'>xi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squire;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pgxcv'>xcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Standish;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's pseudonym taken by John Wiseman, S.J. <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanhope, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife Father Gerard's aunt <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, Sir William; <ref target='Pglxii'>lxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife's death <ref target='Pgcxcviii'>cxcviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calls Fr. Gerard cousin <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buys the Liége property <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his forces <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, Sir Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>took part with Mary Queen of Scots <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanny, Thomas, S.J.; <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starkie;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's pseudonym taken by Thomas Wiseman, S.J., <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staunton, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Germain, Marquis of; <ref target='Pgcclviii'>cclviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoke Pogis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>house at <ref target='Pgcxxxv'>cxxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searched <ref target='Pgcxlvi'>cxlvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone, Marmaduke, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father Gerard's MS. received by <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strand;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's house near <ref target='Pgclxii'>clxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxiii'>ccxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strange, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortured in the Tower <ref target='Pgclxxiv'>clxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgclxxiv'>clxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxxix'>ccxxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken in Warwickshire <ref target='Pgclxxvii'>clxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mrs. Vaux asks his release <ref target='Pgclxxxii'>clxxxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Stratford'/>
<l>Stratford, Arthur <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Shefford; <ref target='Pgxvii'>xvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stratforde, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in Mr. Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stuart Papers at Rome <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffield, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>William Wiseman's man, <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffolk, Earl of, Lord Chamberlain;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage proposed between his daughter and Lord Vaux <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reads the letter <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>searches the vaults <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Garnett, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Father Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutton, John; <ref target='Pglxvi'>lxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutton, William, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard's tutor <ref target='Pgxii'>xii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swetnam, Francis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>servant to Mrs. Vaux, examined <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Talbot'/>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Talbot, Sir George</hi>, of Grafton, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Morton;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard calls him cousin <ref target='Pgcxcix'>cxcix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friend of Maximilian Duke of Bavaria <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>well received by King James and Archbishop Abbot <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>afterwards ninth Earl of Shrewsbury <ref target='Pgcc'>cc</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talbot, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Novice Master at Louvain <ref target='Pgcxcv'>cxcv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclix'>cclix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanfield, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Jeremy;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quotation from, on equivocation <ref target='Pgccxi'>ccxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tesimond'/>
<l>Tesimond, Oswald <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Greenway <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Philip Beaumont, S.J.; ccxlviii,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bates' evidence against <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused in Proclamation <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed for attainder <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>named by Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cleared by Thomas Winter <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crossed the sea <ref target='Pgclxxxii'>clxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his narrative <ref target='Pgcxxvi'>cxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxlviii'>ccxlviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thomson'/>
<l>Thomson <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Blackburn, Wm.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pgxv'>xv</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxiii'>lxxiii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorpe, John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Lord Arundell <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Father Stone <ref target='Pgccli'>ccli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tichburn, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr, betrayed by Atkinson <ref target='Pgcxxx'>cxxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tierney, Mark Anthony, Canon;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Communion of the conspirators <ref target='Pgccxxiii'>ccxxiii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of a quoted letter <ref target='Pgccxxv'>ccxxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titchborn, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Shelley'>Shelley</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomson, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gerard'>Gerard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Topcliffe, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examinations by <ref target='Pglxi'>lxi</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>, <ref target='Pglxxxiv'>lxxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned <ref target='Pglxxxvi'>lxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a prophet <ref target='Pglxxxvi'>lxxxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tortures Fr. Southwell <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>describes Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgclxxxvii'>clxxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torture in the Tower;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manner of <ref target='Pgxcvii'>xcvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effects of <ref target='Pgcv'>cv</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tower;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Thomas Gerard and Mr. Roulston in <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sir Thomas Gerard
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
in the second time <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Father Gerard removed to <ref target='Pgxc'>xc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Henry Walpole's cell in <ref target='Pgxc'>xc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torture in <ref target='Pgxcvii'>xcvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beasts in <ref target='Pgcxii'>cxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mass in <ref target='Pgcxv'>cxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard escapes from <ref target='Pgcxvii'>cxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Garnett and Fr. Ouldcorne sent to <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anne Vaux taken to <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ralph Ashley and John Grissold tortured in <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nicholas Owen killed by torture in <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tregian, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condemned for having an Agnus Dei <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tresham, Francis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his family <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>out with Lord Essex <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joins the Plot <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suspected of betraying it <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when dying retracts what he had said against Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>when at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumbol;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English Agent in Belgium <ref target='Pgcxcviii'>cxcviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tutbury Castle;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mary Queen of Scots confined there <ref target='Pgx'>x</ref>, <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrrel, Anthony;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Clink <ref target='Pglxxxi'>lxxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Usher</hi>, Bishop of Armagh;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his opinion of Powder Plot <ref target='Pgccxlviii'>ccxlviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Vaux, Anne</hi>; visits Mrs. Heywood <ref target='Pgcxxxviii'>cxxxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Lord Vaux's from a long journey <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her friendly offices to Father Garnett <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defended by him at his death <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deceived by the keeper <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken to the Tower <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her confession <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaux, Edward Lord; <ref target='Pgcxxxi'>cxxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage proposed with Earl of Suffolk's daughter <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>has two houses three miles apart <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned <ref target='Pgclxxxv'>clxxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examined by Lord Salisbury <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaux, Elizabeth; <ref target='Pgcxxxi'>cxxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her courage before the Council <ref target='Pgclxxxii'>clxxxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned and found at Mass <ref target='Pgclxxxv'>clxxxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaux, George;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Elizabeth Roper <ref target='Pgcxxxii'>cxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Hackney <ref target='Pgcxxxiv'>cxxxiv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mother <ref target='Pgcxxxv'>cxxxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaux, Sir Ambrose; <ref target='Pgclxxiv'>clxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Villa Mediana, Conde de;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spanish Ambassador, <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclvii'>cclvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>had Father Garnett's straw in his keeping <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitelleschi, Mutius, General S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends to the Bishop of Chalcedon to clear Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Wade, Sir William</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Secretary to Privy Council <ref target='Pglxxx'>lxxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxciii'>xciii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxvi'>ccxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>while under torture <ref target='Pgc'>c</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>professes to bring message from the Queen <ref target='Pgci'>ci</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shows his knowledge of Fr. Garnett's house in Spital <ref target='Pgcxliii'>cxliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reviles Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings him for trial <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes Mr. Tresham's man <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wales, Prince of; <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walley, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Garnett'>Garnett</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallis, Richard and Wm.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in Mr. Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpole, Henry, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyr <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pgxcv'>xcv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his cell in Tower <ref target='Pgxc'>xc</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invoked by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgcxxiii'>cxxiii</ref>, his constancy <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpole, Michael, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>serves Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxv'>lxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciles a knight <ref target='Pgclxvi'>clxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extract of a letter from <ref target='Pgccxlv'>ccxlv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walpole, Richard, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Valladolid, Vice-prefect of the English mission <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walsyngham, Sir Francis;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his daughter marries Lord Dunkellin and is converted <ref target='Pgclix'>clix</ref>, <ref target='Pgclxi'>clxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines Br. Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waltham, Great;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Northend in <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watson's;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason hindered by Jesuits <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specially by Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and by Fr. Garnett <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he begs pardon of the Society at his death <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>James' promises to him <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>West;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a messenger between Priests <ref target='Pgccliii'>ccliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westmoreland;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no such of the Society <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weston, William <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Edmunds, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wears clerical dress in prison <ref target='Pglxxxi'>lxxxi</ref>, in Wisbech <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his virtue <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitmore, Novice, S.J.; <ref target='Pgcci'>cci</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whyneyard, Keeper of Wardrobe;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lets the vaults <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whyte, Andrew, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>writes to Fr. Gerard for Green <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finds Father Garnett's straw <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ellis'>Ellis</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<lg>
<l>Williams; his treason <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pgxcv'>xcv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williamson, Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found in Mr. Wiseman's house <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willis, Ralph;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Lady Gerard's <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attends on Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Priest at Rome <ref target='Pglxv'>lxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>author of <hi rend='italic'>English Martyrology</hi> <ref target='Pgccxlix'>ccxlix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wimbish;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Braddocks in, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winchester Nuns; <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winifred's (St.) Well;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Garnett's journey <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclxii'>cclxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Ouldcorne cured <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winsor, the Lord;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his armoury at Warwick <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Worcester <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts a felon in prison <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>execution <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his estate and marriage <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joins the Plot <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>escapes for a time <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tried in Westminster Hall <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter, Thomas;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of the first conspirators <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Huddington <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his scholarship <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a friend of Catesby <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>is sent to the Constable of Spain <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wounded and taken <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his confession <ref target='Pgccxxiv'>ccxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken to Westminster Hall for trial <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not at Lord Vaux's <ref target='Pgcclvi'>cclvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisbech;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prisoners at famished <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Anne;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Nun of Sion <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Anne;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a widow <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Barbara;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbess of Sion <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Bridget;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an Augustinianess at Louvain <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crosses the sea <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, George;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Upminster, Justice of Peace <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Jane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an Augustinianess at Louvain <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crosses the sea <ref target='Pgxliv'>xliv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Jane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daughter of Sir Edmund Huddleston <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her character <ref target='Pglxxviii'>lxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Jane;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the widow <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her house at Northend <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her pilgrimage to Wisbech <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condemned to <hi rend='italic'>peine forte et dure</hi> <ref target='Pgxxxii'>xxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her house searched <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Gatehouse <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confronted with Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxxxii'>lxxxii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, John, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entered the Society in Rome and died there <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pseudonym of Scudamore a Priest <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Mary;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daughter of Anne, a recusant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Mary;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>daughter of George, a recusant <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Robert;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Clink <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>died in battle in Belgium <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, Thomas, S.J.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entered the Society in Rome and died at St. Omers <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, William;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his house, Braddocks, in Wimbish, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knighted <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his descendants <ref target='Pgcclv'>cclv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Lady Gerard <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his arrest <ref target='Pgxlvii'>xlvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his examination <ref target='Pgxlviii'>xlviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Braddocks searched <ref target='Pglii'>lii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his book written in prison <ref target='Pglxxvii'>lxxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>released for money, lives near the Clink, returns to Braddocks <ref target='Pglxxviii'>lxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woodroff, Lady Elizabeth; <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woodward;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Priest <ref target='Pgcxxviii'>cxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worcester, Earl of;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worsley;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a pursuivant <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christopher; enters the conspiracy <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entrusts money to Bates <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Flanders <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shot <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wright, John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of the first conspirators <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his early life <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shot <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken to Westminster Hall for trial <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Yelverton, Sir Christopher</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sister converted <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>one of Fr. Garnett's judges <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorke;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treason <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorke, Sir John;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brief for his prosecution <ref target='Pgcclvii'>cclvii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, Richard;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>examines John Frank <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>William Wiseman <ref target='Pgl'>l</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fr. Gerard <ref target='Pglxi'>lxi</ref>, <ref target='Pglxvii'>lxvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Brother Emerson <ref target='Pgccliv'>ccliv</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes a bribe <ref target='Pglxix'>lxix</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forswears himself <ref target='Pglxvii'>lxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgccxviii'>ccxviii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies miserably <ref target='Pglxxix'>lxxix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zuniga, Don Pedro de</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Flemish Ambassador <ref target='Pgclxxxiv'>clxxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgcxciii'>cxciii</ref>, <ref target='Pgcclvii'>cclvii</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Donna Maria de <ref target='Pgcxciv'>cxciv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
